Lawyer seeks user-pays NCSC, takeover tribunal By JOSEPH DOWLING and BEN POTTER  

The National Companies and Securities Commission should be entirely self-
funded and its power to hold hearings in relation to takeovers and market 
practices should be transferred to a takeover tribunal.
  The eminent takeover lawyer, Mr John Green from Freehill Hollingdale and 
Page, made these demands yesterday at a Sydney seminar on takeover 
legislation.
  Mr Green said the concept of "user pays" should apply to the NCSC, and he 
pointed out that the Securities and Exchange Commission in the United States 
and the Ontario Securities Commission were both self-funding.
  He said the NCSC should be freed from the restraints of government 
limitations on salaries and that the commission should be allowed to pay what 
was necessary to retain expert staff.
  "The securities markets and transactions in them move exceedingly quickly.
  "Therefore we need an NCSC that can move as quickly and readily and is able 
to call on outside expert resources if it needs to supplement its own.
  "If we had a system of self-funding, the costs of the system would fall on 
those who use and benefit from it rather than the general taxpayer," he said.
  The NCSC would raise the funds for its operations through charging 
additional fees, either for incorporation of companies, registration of 
takeover bids, lodgment of prospectuses or stock exchange trades.
  He said the current fees for registration of takeover bids were absurdly low 
at $330 for a cash bid and $660 for a non-cash offer.
  "If the fees were, say 0.01 per cent of the final bid price capitalisation 
of the target, (ie. $100 for every $1 million, with a minimum fee of $10,000) 
that should not be a significant deterrent for making bids."
  He suggested a takeover tribunal should be established with a senior 
commercial lawyer or judge as its full-time head and two other members drawn 
from a panel of part-time members with relevant experience.
  "The tribunal would not be bound by the rules of evidence and would have 
powers similar to the subpoena powers of the courts.
  "Importantly, especially given the types of legal actions recently mounted, 
no question of procedure or of fact determination by the tribunal could be 
appealed to any court.                    
  "Under this proposal, what would happen is that where the NCSC was concerned 
about some conduct it would - and it may under its existing powers - 
investigate.
  "It would not and could not hold hearings.
  "Once it formed a view that what had occurred was, for example, 
unacceptable, it would then apply to the tribunal for an appropriate order.
  "The tribunal would hold the hearing, not the NCSC.  The NCSC could not then 
be embarrassed because it also had an incompatible quasi-judicial function," 
he said.
  Also speaking at the conference, the Victorian Attorney-General, Mr Jim 
Kennan, said the NCSC and the Ministerial Council were working with 
international market regulators on proposals for the exchange of securities 
information for enforcing legislation. 
  He told the conference that the regulators were also examining guidelines 
for the acceptance of prospectuses and said these were the first steps in 
international cooperation and would assist Australian investors wanting to 
take advantage of foreign capital markets.
  He said bilateral arrangements between Australia and the US for the 
recognition of prospectuses had been proposed by the US Securities and 
Exchange Commission.
  In addition, Australia would seek to include companies and securities law 
in the multilateral treaty on mutual assistance in criminal matters.
  Negotiations were afoot to link the Sydney Futures Exchange with 
international futures exchanges and for an agreement on the exchange of market 
information in commodities futures trading,  Mr Kennan said.
  And a meeting to be held in London shortly would look at multilateral and 
bilateral treaties on securities regulation, he said.
  "It is envisaged that these treaties will seek to develop ways in which 
market malpractice across international boundaries can be deterred, detected 
and investigated."
  Mr Kennan also called for discussion on raising extra funds from the private 
sector, saying it was not possible to raise the level of State and Federal 
government funding during a period of budgetary restraint.
  Options were to raise fees across the board, levy further fees on 
incorporation and the filing of annual returns (perhaps with a loading for 
listed companies), and further fees on securities licenses.  Registration fees 
could depend on issued or authorised capital, Mr Kennan said.

