FACING UP TO SPRING By Fashion Editor KERRY YATES  

There's an important fashion message to be read into every label in the new 
spring ranges from the leading French cosmetic houses.
  Bourjois has given the `green light' to exciting brights with its Feu Vert 
collection and Harriet Hubbard Ayer invites you on a Weekend Exotique.
  Christian Dior takes a retro trip to the colonies with Les Coloniales and 
Yves Saint Laurent's Fatale imparts a warning that it's fatal NOT to try the 
mysterious colors inspired by the heroines of Alfred Hitchcock movies.
  The fantasies involved in planning the new spring faces are fascinating.  
  Once the companies decide on their inspiration for the season, they go 
head-over-heels to name all their products along that particular theme. 
  All very theatrical, and that's how you'll feel with the dramatic color 
changes we'll be facing up to this spring.
  All the top makeup companies have one certain message: spring faces will 
be bold, bright and beautiful.  
  Top fashion colors like tangerine, violet, turquoise, shocking pink, and 
brilliant blue, also go to the eyes.
  All the cosmetic houses have those strong shades in eyeshadows, with matching 
eye-pencils and mascaras.  How you mix the shades is up to you but always 
apply a pale shadow like white, beige, pale pink over the eyelid right up
to the eyebrow first, making a base to take the next color.
  Matt faces are given a warm tint with a dusting of beige or pink tonings, 
blended to almost nothing.
  Lips are outlined with pencil and smudged to form a base for the lipstick. 
Lipsticks are shimmering, almost invisible lip glosses or soft, creamy 
shades for day, and wild-as-you-dare after dark.  Do try some of the frosted 
multi-colored lipsticks by Lancome which combine unusual colors like orange 
and irridescent violet for a rainbow effect.
  CHRISTIAN DIOR was inspired by movies like Out of Africa and Somerset 
Maugham novels in creating its soft, reflective Les Coloniales range.  A rose 
lipstick named Colonial, a blue-rose shade Hammock and a lip shimmer called 
Parasol bring to mind delicate English ladies in the colonies.  Eyes are 
bright, cheeks soft, lashes lacquered, lips fresh and cool with irridescent 
shades like Sunshine and Subdued Light.
  ESTEE LAUDER is bold modern and rah-rah-rah with Boating Party Colors.  
Inspired by happy picnics on the lake and a countryside splashed with color, 
the eyeshadow sets include colors like Picnic Wine, Sunrise Peach, Radiant 
Teal and lipsticks in Bright Day Red, Sunripe Melon and Sunrise Beige.  A new 
addition is a Natural Blush Coloring Creme, which helps you to apply color 
lightly and evenly with a sponge.
  HARRIET HUBBARD AYER's Weekend Exotique range promises your face an exotic 
color romp.  Smudge the eyes in intense color using two pearly shades like 
Rose Intense and Campanule (a fresh bright blue), outline the total eye in 
bright blue kajal and apply a dazzling blue mascara. Also exciting is Luminous 
Yellow eyeshade.  Lips bloom with fashion shades of Mandarine, Magnolia 
(brilliant rose) and Hibiscus, a summer red.
  YVES SAINT LAURENT's adventurous Fatale collection is inspired by classical 
beauties like Grace Kelly and Eva Marie Saint, heroines of Alfred Hitchcock 
movies.  Eyes are widened with a daring pink shadow high on the arc and a hint 
of green shading on the lid.  Lashes are smothered in shocking pink mascara 
tipped with turquoise for a starry look.  Sensuous lips are created with 
coral red lipstick.
  Bourjois has signalled the go ahead to light up your face with a range of 
pert, extra bright colors.  Eyes are wild by mixing Feu Vert, bold, fresh 
green - applied directly along the eyelashes and drawn out and up towards the 
eyebrows - with Rose Printemps, a lively intense pink lightening up the arch 
and lid of the eye.  Lashes are brushed thickly with emerald green mascara 
called Emeraude.  Bright, light lips are dressed up with shimmering orange 
(Rebecca) and pink (Cosima).

