BAMBOO EXCHANGE OPENS FOR BUSINESS  

CHINESE citizens are now able to buy and sell shared issues by two Shanghai 
companies in the country's first stock market since the 1949 communist 
takeover.
  The official Xinhua news agency said more than $US21,000 worth of shares 
changed hands when the limited market opened on Friday in Shanghai.
  "Shareholders will trade their stocks freely on the market according to the 
prices quoted and pay a certain amount of commission after transactions are 
concluded," Xinhua said.
  Trading will be restricted to shares issued by the Shanghai Acoustics 
Equipment Producing Company and the Yanzhong Industrial Company Ltd.  The 
former has issued 500,000 yuan ($US135,100) and the latter, five million yuan 
($US1.35 million) in 50 yuan stocks.
  Many Chinese enterprises sell shares to their employees, but this will be 
the first time that stocks will be traded freely.
  LI Xiangrui, president of the Shanghai branch of the People's Bank of China, 
said, however, that conditions are not yet ripe for long-term fund markets or 
a general stock exchange.
  "The limited stock trading may serve as a trial balloon, which will 
stimulate enterprises to institute the stock system and pave the way for 
establishing a stock exchange in the city," LI said.
  As part of its financial reforms, the government freed Chinese enterprises 
to issue and sell stocks and bonds two years ago.
  The policy was designed to encourage firms to use such sales to raise 
capital, thereby reducing the financial drain on state coffers and 
encouraging the use of personal savings.
  Shanghai is China's leading industrial and commercial area and was the 
main financial center until the 1949 communist revolution.
  After the takeover, the city's financial markets were closed and until 
recent years stock exchanges were vilified as capitalist institutions.
  The country's first experimental bond market opened last month in the 
northeastern city of Shenyang.
  Shenyang was also selected for China's first bankruptcy, which was 
declared in August.
  Xinhua said assets of the firm, the Shenyang Explosion Proof Equipment 
Factory, were sold off last week in the country's first ever property 
auction.
  The factory was bought as an entity by the engineering section of the 
Shenyang Gas Supply Co for 200,000 yuan ($US54,000).
  Chinese economists are alarmed at the number of state-run enterprises 
running at a loss, but efforts to formulate a nationwide bankruptcy law have 
been delayed, apparently because of fears of widespread layoffs.

