Crocodile incident marks second time round for Alf BRISBANE  

- A Proserpine man mauled on Sunday by a 2 metre "pet" 
crocodile had heroically saved his younger brother from a croc 
attack in a boyhood drama.
  Mr Alf Casey, 69, of O'Connell River, is recovering in the 
Mackay Hospital.
  Doctors removed his right arm to the elbow after the mauling by 
the 100kg croc, "Charlene", which Mr Casey had looked after for 
24 years.
  Charlene was given to the family by a professional hunter and 
the bond between it and Mr Casey was so strong that he had often 
taken it to the local pub with him.
  Mr Casey has urged wildlife officers not to destroy the croc, 
which was yesterday freighted to Townsville after it turned on 
him as he fed it in a backyard enclosure.
  He poked the croc in the eyes in a desperate attempt to escape. 
  His wife, Mrs Rae Casey, 63, said that as a boy, Mr  Casey had 
dragged his brother out of the O'Connell River seconds before a 
4m croc was about to attack.
  Mrs Casey said Alf had grown up with crocodiles, with the 
reptiles swimming to a waterhole off the river only 150m from his 
house.
  She said Mr Casey had tried raising other crocs before 
Charlene, but none survived.
  "Alf would not want Charlene shot.  He is very preservation-
minded," Mrs Casey said.
  Mrs Casey said her husband, "a strong healthy man", had lost 
three fingers on his left hand in a chainsaw accident two years 
ago.
  Mr Ed Casey (ALP, Mackay) said today he had known the Casey 
family for many years and Alf's relationship with Charlene was 
a talking point in the north.
  "The croc would travel with Alf wherever he went.  He would 
throw the croc in a back of his utility and often would walk down 
the street with the croc on a leash," Mr Casey said.

