Grand jury's historic role: judge  

Victoria's first grand jury in 46 years was today empanelled in 
the Supreme Court to decide if a solicitor should be sent for 
[Atrial on fraud charges.
  Mr Justice O'Bryan told the 17 women and six men comprising the 
grand jury that it was an historic and important event.
  He told them their function was unusual and very different from 
ordinary criminal proceedings.  
  The defendant, John Gerard McArdle, played no part in the 
hearing and was not represented, the judge said.  Neither the 
judge nor any barristers took part.
  The judge said legal tradition meant he had to ask the grand 
jury panel whether any of them were aliens or outlaws.
  Before the court was cleared and became the grand jury chamber, 
the judge spent about two hours explaining the function of the 
grand jury.
  He said their job was not to decide if McArdle was guilty or 
innocent, it was to decide whether or not he should be sent for 
trial.
  Mr Justice O'Bryan said this meant a different standard of 
proof, which was that there was "probable evidence in support of 
an offence".
  It also meant that unlike other juries, only a majority of 
them, that is 12, need be satisfied one way or the other.
  The judge told the grand jury the two charges alleged against 

McArdle were fraudulent conversion under the Crimes Act and 
conspiracy to defraud under common law.
  The judge said the grand jury should ignore anything they had 
read or heard about the procedure.
  "It is not for you or me to decide if the grand jury procedure 
is the most appropriate procedure.  That is for the State 
Parliament."
  The judge said the foreman would have to write on the 
indictments either "true bill" which meant McArdle would be sent 
for trial or "not a true bill."
  The judge said the grand jury deliberations and examination of 
witnesses would be completely secret and any notes they took 
would be shredded later.
  The hearing is not finished.

