Outcry over prices for Brisbane Expo BRISBANE  

- The Federal Government will intervene to try to force 
down the price of tickets for Brisbane's World Fair.
  A family of two adults and three children face admission prices 
of $95 a day.
  Expo 88 is due to run from April to October over a massive area 
of Brisbane, centred along the south bank of the Brisbane River.
  Nineteen countries have so far agreed to take part, with 
organisers aiming for about 30.
  The prices, announced yesterday by Expo 88 chairman, Sir Llew 
Edwards provoked an immediate outcry from consumer groups.
  Mr Keith Wright, chairman of the Federal Government's Consumer 
Affairs committee said: "Those prices are unbelievable and it is 
a great pity.
  "I shall write officially to Sir Llew, explaining that the high 
prices will be an early deterrent and will influence people's 
attitudes about Expo.
  "I am sure I can convince him the cost of running Expo can be 
offset by attracting large groups of school pupils and pensioners 
as well as youth organisations.
  "We must do something to get that admission price down."
  Season tickets during the Expo will cost $160 for adults and 
$95 for children and pensioners.
  But the tickets will go on sale soon for $99 and $60, 
increasing in price by up to $15 each three months until April, 
1988.
  Sir Llew said there was a definite incentive to buy season 
tickets early.
  He said research showed people with season tickets were likely 
to visit at least 3 times.
  "This works out at $8.30 a visit for adults and only $5 a visit 
for pensioners and children using their early season tickets, 
said Sir Llew.
  But Mr Wright, the former State Opposition leader who also is 
president of the Queensland Consumers' Association, said that by 
the time inflation gnawed at the season ticket price its 
advantage would be lost.
  Mr Wright said the Expo 88 chairman must explain fully how he 
arrived at the prices.
  "High prices are such a pity because the social and cultural 
impact for many Australians, let alone Queenslanders, will be 
tremendously important."

