By Cherry Cordner CHAPTER EIGHTEEN  

AND SO I WAS.
And so I was sitting under my fig tree, and my world set itself
up around me and became tangible.
  It was the late nineteen-thirties. In official accounts, in
statistics, in history books, the Depression was over. Not in
our street.
  Rather grand furniture you have, someone said. Axminster
carpets, heavily patterned, with elaborate borders, the
centres loaded with abundant flowers, geometric shapes, in
pinks, golds, silver-greys. The most luxurious available, to
match the art-deco furniture. Curved doors on the Italianate
sideboard, a Florentine mirror above, its elegant oval shape
echoed in the backs of the dining-chairs. Imported Belgian
glass on sideboard and dining-table. Dark-blue lounge suite of
plushy velvet with great curved arms. Gold velvet curtains hung
in graceful waves, like a panniered skirt, interspersed with
gold lace drops.
  "Darling, it was a skirt. A ball gown. There I was, just a
girl in an office, and I received an invitation to a ball, a
wonderful, glamorous ball. And I didn't have a dress beautiful
enough to wear. When I was a young girl, an old woman once said
to me, `Never refuse an invitation because you don't have the
right clothes. This may be the most wonderful outing of your
life. Always go. Get the clothes somehow. And go anyway. The
men won't notice what you're wearing, and the women don't
matter. Go.'
  "So l bought that dress, and for a night I was a princess.
And when there were no more balls like that for me, why, I
turned it into our sitting-room curtains. Imagine me, in that
gold shimmering skirt. Ah, the music...."
  My parents' bedroom held its breath lest it could not contain
so much furniture. A huge wardrobe, a smaller male counterpart,
both with the ubiquitous curve of glossy veneered doors,
repeated in the dressing-table and bedhead. Generous bevelled
mirrors set at angles so that I could watch diminishing
reflections of myself beckoning from immense distances. Pink-
and-gold teardrop handles on all the doors. The glass top of
the dressing-table covered with a multitude of individual hand-
crocheted doilies.
  "They were all made by your Great-aunt Gert. Poor Gert. I'll
tell you about her another time. But the furniture, dear, was
bought when your father and I were first married, when we had
everything."
  All this was part of a world that had shrunk to monochrome.
The house, too small for its contents, was part of the falling
away. Murriverie Road, Bondi. Bondi, squalid, faded, falsely
famous. A rented narrow-fronted bungalow. A chipheater in the
bathroom at the end of the back veranda. There was an ice-chest
in the kitchen, and one of my jobs was to listen for the
iceman, for my mother could not hear his bell. It was sixpence
for the block of ice, one block for the weekend, another mid-
week if we could afford it. We used to break small pieces off
the block to suck in summer, until we discovered commercial ice
was full of ammonia.
  Two other cries were heard every week in the street: the
clothes props man with his dispirited horse and mournful wail:
"Clo-o-o-thes pro-o-ps." (We could never help him, because our
old prop never broke.) And the bottle-o, more robust and
cheerful in his call: "Bottle-O-O-O!" He paid twopence a dozen
for bottles, and if I could collect and sell so many, I was
rich. After all, a real ice-cream cone was only a penny.
  There was a knock at the front door. Reaching up with
difficulty I opened it. Standing there was one of those
defeated men, drained face, drained voice, drained hope.
  "Is your mother in, girlie?"
  My mother came from her garden. The two seemed to understand
each other. Why this was so was not explained to me - perhaps
it was presumed I understood, or perhaps I was thought to be
too young.
   "No, there isn't anything for you to do, but come round and
sit in the garden."
  While my mother rattled around in the kitchen, I peered round
the corner at him.
  "Got a play house here under the tree, have you? And the
little pool with the gnomes?" He looked wistfully at such signs
of permanency. His hands trembled with the strain of many days
searching for work.
  Carefully, I carried the tray out to him. Bread-and-butter
and soup, and afterwards a cup of tea and sixpence in the
saucer. My mother had counted the coins in her purse several
times before she selected the sixpence.
   "Don't just stand and stare at him. It's bad manners," she
whispered.
  Later, we took our snack into the garden and she escaped in
her usual fashion. "It was not always like this. When your
father and I were first married, why, we were so prosperous. We
had everything. Except a house. I wanted your father to buy a
house, but he always wanted to wait until he could afford
something better. And `until' never came. But take my
grandparents. They lived in a boom time, there in Goolwa...."
  Having grappled unsuccessfully with the concept of time
passing, and these eternally revolving relatives of mine, I
asked my father to explain the present and the past to me. He
did so in his own terms.
   "Imagine a railway journey. You have decided to travel
around all the major centres in the area. As you enter each one
the houses and roads and people become visible. It is as though
they have sprung into existence to communicate with you.
   "You spend some time there, you experience adventures, then
you leave. As the train rushes out of the station and away, it
is as though the town ceases to exist. It has ceased to exist
for you, but it stood before you arrived and it continues on
after you have lost contact with it.
   "So it is with time. Everything has always been and will
always continue to be. With our small egos in our luggage we
travel along as if we were aboard that train. Along the way
certain segments of the journey are illuminated for a brief
time, then blink away into the darkness. Some of us leave with
heavier bags, as we accumulate wisdom. Others of us, of
course, depart empty-handed."
  Did that explain why sometimes, from the time-train window
one caught glimpses of faces on which not even the expressions
had ever changed - while other faces encouraged speculation on
the extra weight of their luggage?
  Aunt Adelaide, for instance. My Great-aunt Adelaide. The only
one of all those aunts and uncles I had ever seen. I could not
equate the young woman riding on the Goolwa tram with a bag of
tomatoes with the crabbed figure we visited at long intervals.
In the dark sitting-room, overshadowed by the furniture, we
munched biscuits and sipped tea. As a special treat I was
allowed into the pantry to put my hand in the large Arnotts
biscuit tin. I spent most of my time there feeling I had
committed a great sin in being born a child. And surely one day
my fingers would find not a biscuit but a funnel-web spider.
She seemed centuries older than my Grandmother Kate. She was a
witch if I ever saw one, alone in that house in Rose Bay, now
so overgrown with creepers and spiders it was as though she was
a petrified corpse within.
  Her victims, Neilson and Edith, lived on the far side of
Sydney and they too were seen rarely. My parents felt they
could not live up to the expected level of formality; no doubt
Neilson and Edith, in turn, found my parents far too bohemian.
But Neilson visited his mother with undiminished regularity.
One pay packet, two houses, two sets of bills, too little
spinal starch.
  I met my Uncle George. My Great-uncle, George Sprigg.
Clutching at his broken link with us, his wife Gert long dead,
seeking out the only relatives he could claim, borrowing other
people's grandchildren. I recall faded Dundreary whiskers, sad
eyes. He seemed immensely tall. But then, I was immensely
short.
  One image of him: dumping his dessert on top of his meat and
eating both together. A remnant of the harsh inland customs of
his youth. Strange. I was never allowed to do this, yet no one
made a comment, or gave him a disapproving glance.
  Another vignette. After my kiss of greeting, he returned to
give a much longer caress to my cousin Jill. Looking over her
head at us all, he explained, `Jill must be my special girl.
Jill has straight hair. We must always take special care of
little girls with straight hair. The world expects that they
should all have curly hair."
  My mother's Ma and Pa, Kate and Walter, were easily
classified. Still bickering, still together, still present at
all our family occasions. They now lived in a small flat in
Rose Bay.
  I never recall seeing my grandfather drinking. 
   "No, he doesn't now," my mother agreed, after I had tried to
compare her stories of the past with the present. "He simply
does not have the money to drink. Your grandma controls the
purse strings now, you see."
  To me, for ever, there is the memory of poetry recitations,
of my grandfather hearing my spelling from my brown spelling-
book. He told me classical myths, showed me the stars in the
night sky, took me for picnics on the beach, and to afternoons
with the archers in the park at Rose Bay. I was the only person
not to judge him, because I was too young to have access to the
evidence. I hope that perhaps it helped to soothe the wounds of
time.
  And Spence. He ricocheted in and out of our lives. Ever the
charmer, the roving sailor, the affectionate uncle, the loving
son helping his mother with household expenses. No doubt he
would still have liked to wave chamber-pots to shock the
proper, but the responsibility of a home and family (he had
married again) somewhat dampened his firecracker exuberance.
  I had not one but two homes, for events in my Aunt Baby's
house were inseparable from my own. My mother and my aunt had
not been parted. A small house in Rose Bay, near my
grandparents, was rented for Baby until she made the decision
to leave Australia. Soon, soon, everyone murmured. Year after
year... Uncle Bill was a figure who appeared at intervals like
an out-of-season Santa Claus, with presents for everyone, and
news of the great technicolour world of the United States. He
brought the latest gadget wizardry. A lemon-squeezer, for
example. All we had ever known were small glass moulds with a
rippled surface on which you impaled the lemon, your success
depending on the strength of your wrist.
  "Are you all watching?" he boomed. "See. A metal lemon-
squeezer. On a stand, You put the glass directly under it. You
put the half-lemon or orange over the inverted cone, you rotate
the handle, down comes the cover and exerts pressure on the
fruit. No strength required, yet behold - complete extraction
of the juice."
   "And then it comes apart for washing." Baby was delighted
with her new toy.
  Surely, we all felt, we had reached the ultimate in
technological achievement .
  The inexorable train pounds ceaselessly over its iron road;
I revisit other moments.
  Holding a packet of Bushells' tea beside her shoulder, Mavis
posed for a photograph. A cheap way of obtaining the services
of a model. Dick used the outline as his guide, and in due
course produced the latest in advertising gimmickry. The whole
window of a grocer's shop could be turned into the panorama of
an Indian tea estate, with an entire community toiling for
Bushells. Cardboard cut-outs of Indian girl tea-pickers
plucked tea leaves from cardboard cut-out tea plants, the whole
diminishing away to a backdrop of misty tea-covered hills. 
  "See' - she holds me up for a better view.

