By Connie Miller Chapter Nine  

Even in the quiet of home, with Mum and Dad, I still considered
I was making the right move in going to Melbourne. I thought
things out carefully and had to accept that by now there was
little chance of my marrying and having children. Men who had
been really interested in me had been too young or too old, or
their education had been so much less than mine that I hadn't
dared encourage their friendship. And last of all there had
been Wally, a married man. It had left me with mixed emotions
of shame, and sadness, and an unpleasant bitterness.
     During early March I flew to Victoria (on a DC 3 piloted
by Captain Harry Baker, who by then had an Australia-wide
reputation as a skilful pilot), and at Melbourne's Victoria
Barracks I made contact with Naval Headquarters. Through the
Director of Naval Intelligence I was assured of a position in
his department, beginning in April.
     But, not long afterwards, the delight of knowing that was
embittered. Edna Kersten and her small daughter Lee, then a
very pretty five-year-old with her father's dark hair and dark
amber eyes, were staying in Melbourne. Edna's news was tragic.
In the May of 1942 while flying a twin-engined Hudson medium
bomber, Ken had disappeared over the Island of Ambon. He was
the first of several of our friends lost during those war-torn
years.
     Back in Western Australia I called at the Education
Department to argue my way free from the teaching profession.
The Department had moved from the old Treasury Buildings to
Government House Ballroom across the Terrace; American military
authorities were in the former place.
     I packed a few special books, my electric sewing machine,
my radio and clothes in a trunk, and once again set out for the
east. In those days there were changes of train at Kalgoorlie,
Port Pirie and Adelaide because of the changes in railway
gauge. But by 1943 I was quite familiar with the long train
journey between Perth and Melbourne. The Navy Office had booked
me in at the Queen's Hotel on Toorak Road; within days I had
located a small flat in Henry Street, off St Kilda Road.

And so, early in April 1943, I walked through the massive,
bluestone gateway of Melbourne's Victoria Barracks. My
feelings were naturally a little mixed. I had given up a well-
paid position in a state I knew well, for a wartime job where
I had very little idea of what I was expected to do, and where
I knew no one.
     But any secret dreams I may have had about a Mata Hari
existence or dangerous secret service missions were soon
forgotten. The work was more clerical, I suppose, than anything
else. And recalling the huge posters IS YOUR JOURNEY REALLY
NECESSARY? and DON'T TALK, THE ENEMY LISTENS! on practically
every railway station between Perth and Melbourne, I wondered
had my journey been necessary? And had I talked too volubly to
the young man with a slightly foreign accent who had bought me
coffee at Ballarat? Floating about in my mind there were a few
doubts about the step I had taken.
     But life in wartime Melbourne quickly resolved itself into
a highly coloured and never-to-be-forgotten experience. My
flat, one of a group of four on a short street just across Punt
Road, appealed to me because of its price and its nearness to
the Barracks. The adjacent but bigger flat housed half a dozen
WAAFs. Below me lived a gaunt, elderly gentleman and his
equally elderly, but friendly de facto wife. Below the WAAFs
lived a married couple with (to my intense delight) two pre-
school children. Since the man was one of General Blamey's
drivers, we often had a gleaming black Rolls Royce car on the
street outside the flats.
     This in no way hindered operations conducted in a nearby
laneway off Henry Street. There, in a dilapidated tin shed, it
was possible to buy black market beer at (I was told) five
shillings and sixpence a bottle. The shed appeared to be busy
at all hours; as I passed the lane I sometimes heard loud
arguments in progress. Once, when a savage fight erupted
between Australian and American servicemen, police hurried in
with their batons. From then onwards the vice squad
occasionally patrolled the area.
     From the Barracks itself other forms of entertainment
presented themselves. I worked in the Cypher Room on the third
floor of a new brick building that faced Coventry Street, and
which housed navy and air force personnel. From our room, in
particular, we had grandstand views of the many St Kilda Road
activities. The annual Anzac Day processions, all colour and
sound and majesty, proceeded up the broad walk to the Shrine of
Remembrance. There were the even more colourful Communist
processions, their bands thumping out `The International' and
`The Red Flag'. We watched the solemn and incredibly long
cortege of that grand old soldier, Sir Talbot Hobbs.
     At times we had visits from VlPs. The Mountbattens came to
visit us, and Eleanor Roosevelt. Then, to make sure that we
underlings behaved with due decorum, notices were promulgated,
forbidding `persons or parts of persons to be protruded
through, in, or out of doors or windows, or in corridors while
the visitors were moving about near us. And rather than suffer
torture or death at dawn (we were never informed of the
penalty) we obeyed the orders.
     One day, while the English officers of the Pacific Fleet
were with us, a tall, fair, good-looking young lieutenant
breasted our room's counter and blessed us with smiles his
beard couldn't hide. He was Prince Phillip of Greece and
Denmark, later to become the husband of our present Queen.
     My work was interesting. A signal for simple decoding came
in to us as a page of five-figure numbers in orderly columns.
Briefly the process of decoding was a sort of perverted
subtraction from another set of numbers held in the room. The
key to success lay in starting off correctly. After that, care
rather than skill was all you needed. Each number in the
voluminous code books had two meanings, one purely a vocabulary
meaning, the other geographical. It remained with the decoder
to decide which meaning was intended. We smiled when a beginner
used a vocabulary meaning when she should have used the
geographical. A message came in concerning a naval commander
who was known to be a strict teetotaller. It was decoded as:
`Arriving tight, 190030Z.' It should have read: `Arriving
Sydney, 190030Z.' The 190030Z indicated the nineteenth day of
the month, 10.30 a.m.
     Speed in decoding came quickly and it was surprising how
many of the numbers and answers one could memorise. But since
the tables were altered every month, and the code books
frequently, there was little to be gained by memorising.
     The reverse of the process, coding and cyphering, began
with written messages (signals) which were turned into code by
experienced workers. A young lieutenant who later attained very
high ranking wrongly coded a signal calling a certain ship back
to Port Melbourne. It went out to all ships in the same area as
the wanted one. The error was discovered only after a fleet of
vessels began crowding into Hobson's Bay, and a VIP had asked
why.
     Only too frequently the signals came in `corrupt'. Faulty
transmission or frenzied coding had thrown them out. Then you
had to tackle them with a level head, a great deal of
ingenuity, and a fund of patience. Sometimes, after trying for
an hour or more to untangle a signal, we would have to flash
back to the ship or station a message stating, `Code numbers so
and so corrupt. Please repeat.'
     According to their degree of secrecy messages were
labelled Secret; Most Secret; Hush, Most Secret; and Top
Secret. Then, most important and most secret of all, Bigot! Top
Secrets and Bigots were always done in seclusion and handed to
the OIC immediately upon completion.
     Really alarmed when an English officer of the Pacific
Fleet read over my shoulder a Top Secret I was working on, I
questioned him.
    `My dear girl,' he snapped resentfully, `don't you realise
I've been Bigoted for years?'
     There were highlights during those years at the Barracks,
some humorous, some an escape from the stupidity of war, others
fraught with sadness. When Italy capitulated I decyphered the
message we received. I worked over the signal which, word by
word, broke the news, directed Italian ships to various ports
and informed our own navies of action to be taken. Then, often,
a Top Secret message disclosed action to our north, and at the
end of the signal would come the list of the wounded and dead.
My own brother was up there, and Charles Miller, and several
men whom I'd known for many years. It was then agony for me and
for some of the older men with us whose sons could have taken
part in the action. One pre-dawn morning unidentified planes
were reported over Perth. And on the lighter side I recall a
signal forbidding all sailors to leave their trains at
Kalgoorlie - Kalgoorlie possessed numerous hotels.
     Midnight watch will always be a memorable part of my
wartime job. We worked in three watches; the most ordinary one
was morning watch when we worked from 8.30 a.m. till 3.30 p.m.
Afternoon watch began at 3.30 and ended at 10.30. Midnight
watch began at 11 p.m. and ended at 7 a.m. At first, setting
out for work just as everyone else was on the way home after a
night's entertainment was rather exciting. Tram passengers
looked at us with a certain amount of curiosity. And then, to
be going home when people were taking in their bottles of milk,
when big, shaggy Clydesdales, their lorries still stacked with
morning papers, were clip-clopping along the streets, did seem
to remind you that your work was important.
     Often, going home during mid-winter, I would cut across
the park opposite the Barracks and into the Botanical Gardens
just to see them in their early-morning white-frosted
loveliness. Twice, when a friendly horse-trainer happened to be
going my way, I had a lift home on a trotting spider. One
morning, having been let out early, I found St Kilda Road being
torn up for repairs. And there, visible beneath the shreds of
bitumen, were blocks of solid, good Western Australian jarrah!
     But there were less happy aspects of midnight watch.
During the war years all windows had to be blacked out at
night. Air-conditioning at the Barracks was unheard of, and
almost everyone in the big Cypher Room smoked. The resultant
smoke haze and odour would have to be experienced to be
believed. Small wonder that by four or five in the morning we
all longed for daylight when we could remove the blackout
shutters and fling up the windows.
     Sometimes messages came in from the Barracks canteen to
say that cigarettes were available. Once it was tinned butter,
without coupons. Sometimes it was chocolates. We gladly gave up
an entire lunch hour or tea break to queue for luxuries such as
those. In those bleak days everyone in Melbourne was hungry for
chocolates. Hoadley's factory was close to the Barracks on
Coventry Street, and when word leaked out that they'd
despatched a carton of Violet Crumbles to our nearest
delicatessen, we raced down to it as soon as possible. Now and
then Hilliers, on Bourke Street, had chocolates for sale. We
moved heaven and earth to join their queues. I used to send a
box of their sweets home to Mum and Dad as often as I could.

Many of my female workmates lived in `residentials' near the
Barracks, mostly old houses with their rooms divided up into
smaller rooms (by plywood partitions), each with a minute gas
ring and a shelf for food storage. In these cubbies groups of friends spent many convivial evenings after afternoon watch, the hilarity and talk fuelled with wartime coffee and butterless toast spread with ersatz jam.

