By Brian Sweeney  CHAPTER TWO Stanthorpe and Coo-ee Cordials  

MY mother was a school teacher. And she was shrewd. She
confided in me that she had refused to be taught how to milk a
cow. She managed to have herself transferred from Roma State
School to the Fortitude Valley State School in Brisbane and in
1924, married my father. She was an ambitious woman and, after
I was born in 1925, the newlyweds moved into a hotel -
Sheahan's in Stanthorpe. My father had a good relationship with
the brewery and John Lonergan, subsequently managing director,
convinced Mr Devoy that he was worth supporting as a publican,
although he was very young.
     Both of them said these early years running Sheahan's
Hotel were the happiest years of their lives - a sentiment
certainly expressed by so many young marrieds of every
nationality. At twenty seven, my father became a civic leader
and a popular mine-host. He was always delighted to be able to
recount how A.B. "Banjo" Patterson spent a holiday with them as
a guest at their hotel. I still own Banjo's collected poems
signed by the poet, for my father. On the other side of the
sheet, a broken-down horse-trainer, George Benn (who had walked
700 kilometres from Cunnanulla leading his horse) was able to
tell me of "Bob's" great kindness to him. George subsequently
was a leading trainer in Brisbane. My father had the
pioneering spirit and, in 1929, with two other partners, he
began the first tobacco-growing plantation in Australia (which
later failed) and begot two more children.
     Eventually, the work of a licensed victualler became too
arduous, especially for my mother. As well, there had been a

strike by the drinkers of the town against a beer price rise.
Miss O'Mara of O'Mara's Hotel (her brother was chairman of the
Brisbane Amateur Turf Club and the Queensland legal man for
John Wren) told me that my father had been leader for the five
hotel-keepers of the town and was fearless and wonderful. After
the strike was over, his business did suffer and, as my mother
did not like the environment of a hotel for bringing up
children, it was decided to change to some other type of
business. Eventually we came to Brisbane. It was early 1931 and
with the Great Depression about to strike it was a most
difficult time for a man, with a wife, three children and no
job.
     For a short time, my father was manager of the Queen's
Arms Hotel at New Farm and his money had almost gone. Then he
had the good fortune to meet in a bar (where else?) two of his
old friends, C.K. Norman and R.F.G. (later Sir Reginald)
Fogarty, later managing director of Carlton & United Breweries
Ltd. Mr Norman's firm was one of the creditors of the Coo-ee
Manufacturing Company, which made cordials and soft drinks at
a factory beside the Mater Hospital in South Brisbane. The firm
was bankrupt. Fogarty and Norman said my father should buy it,
and the amount of money needed was £286/6/0. I think my father
only had £20 and he borrowed £260 from my mother's midwife,
Matron Taylor of Finchly Private Hospital, Toowoomba. The
Sweeneys were in soft drinks.
     When I enrolled at the Christian Brothers, St Laurence's
in 1933, it was my sixth different school. There had been a
certain amount of contention as my mother wanted me to go to a
state school and, indeed, I had already been to four of them at
Stanthorpe, Ipswich Road Wooloowin and Coorparoo. However,
here I was at St Laurence's with an octogenarian teacher, the
same man who had taught my father (he was sixty years old then)
at St James, before World War I. Although many of us were in
awe of him (mostly I am sure because of his age), D.D. Quigley
was a dear man. Two things remain with me from my years at St
Laurence's; one, the fact that the relief workers who were
building a football oval for us were paid by the government so
they would not starve; the other, the fact that provided you
were careful, gelignite was not dangerous.
     I spent the next six years with the Brothers, following in
the footsteps of my father. During the whole of my student
time, I did not excel. The question of brains and talent is one
that still puzzles me. Perhaps I was and am mediocre, but I
believe all the early changes of school, and the personal
disruptions of my childhood and youth, made me a certain
mediocrity. (Also, I believe boys who are born late in the year
(in my case, November), should begin school a year later.
This, of course, applies to sport and all other matters.)
     As far as sport was concerned, I was of no account. My
father said I had "two left feet", like him. I was endowed with
an excellent voice and, being the eldest, my mother had me
tutored in every conceivable peripheral activity. There were
singing and piano lessons from the Good Samaritan Sisters (Sister 
Bonaventure), tap dancing in the city at the G.J. Coles
building, Queen Street, and elocution lessons from Miss
O'Reilly. These elocution lessons made my Saturday afternoons
at Rialto Street, Coorparoo, so dreary. The walk home of over
a kilometre was especially tedious.
     But I did get a big chance in the theatre, when I played
Ginger in Ginger Meggs at the Princess Theatre, Annerley Road.
The building is still there. During the last year or so the
Princess has been taken over by Remm Pty Ltd who have
refurbished it and leased it to the TN Theatre Co. We played
two nights in the theatre and gave one special performance for
the nuns at the Mater Hospital. Twenty-five years later, when
I was introduced to the Honourable V.C. Gair, he said to me at
once, " I remember you playing Ginger Meggs at the Princess
Theatre." Although I have no memory of the success or otherwise
of the play, it was a never-to-be-forgotten experience,
especially the red wig.
     One other event of those years that stays in my mind is
the St Patrick's Day March. Brought up as I was, distanced by
a generation from Ireland and its troubles, one would think
that I would have no interest. But, with people of the calibre
of Monsignor John English, the silver-tongued patriot, sitting
for hours with my father and grandmother "talking treason", as
they jokingly called it; one is influenced. I was aware, as we
walked down Queen Street four-abreast ("March on the tram
lines!"), that there was an element of dissent. I was not aware
then of the activities of Dr Mannix in Melbourne in 1919, with
his St Patrick's Day escort of twenty VC winners. Nor did a
ten-year-old know there was such a thing as the Protestant
Labor Party. It is a sign of the growing together of our
peoples that tolerance is more manifest today.
     The Coo-ee Cordial factory prospered almost at once, so
much so that my father bought a new house at Coorparoo - the
first home he had ever owned. My mother, ambitious as ever,
encouraged RJ to purchase another bankrupt softdrink company.
This company was Owen Gardner and Sons, and had been in
business for 85 years. With considerable advice and help from
his accountant, Thomas Miles, and the financial support of the
National Bank, he took possession of the factory in McLachlan
Street, Fortitude Valley. The takeover day was most eventful
for my mother, as her last child - one of twins to survive -
Fabian, was born. The twins were a harbinger of things to come.
It was 3 February 1935.

 CHAPTER THREE Owen Gardner & Sons  

IN 1924, Owen Gardner, a grandson of the founder of the company
of the same name, had taken leave from his business when he
was twenty four years old. He spent more than six years in the
United States of America and it is said that the cessation of
prohibition caused him to return home. Within a year or so of
his homecoming, he had no business, it was insolvent. My
father actually concluded the deal to purchase Owen Gardner &
Sons with Gardner in the Inebriates Home at Dunwich. In
epilogue , it must be said that Owen Gardner remained in the
service of the company until he retired more than twenty five
years later. Many times during that period, I reflected on the
fortunes of this man. (On one occasion, because of his
attachment to drink, the manager, Les Walmsley, gave him two
weeks suspension.)
     The Gardners had been prominent in Queensland since the
original Owen had arrived in Moreton Bay as a purser on a ship
in 1845. He was taken with the beauty of the district and what
seemed to him to be a place of great opportunity. And so, for
almost forty years, he began various businesses, both in the
city and at Strathpine. He founded the Normanby Rum distillery
in the Pine Rivers district, and had extensive timber
interests. He used to bring the timber and rum in his own
vessel to the city. Before long, he helped bring John Hicks
into business, using his timber to make Hixco furniture. He
built a soft drink factory on the river side of William Street,
but one of the floods in the 1870s caused him to rebuild on the
other side of William Street on a block that went through to
100 George Street, where today the premier of Queensland has
his offices. Gardner was most successful and public spirited;
for example, he presented the peal of bells to St John's
Cathedral in Ann Street, where they are still in use. When he
died in 1888, he left his heirs an estate of £120,000.
     The take over of this bankrupt business with Gardner was
very different from the Coo-ee Cordial purchase. It involved an
amount of about £4,000 but it meant that my father now owned
his premises. Moreover, he had trucks, machinery, a new staff
of about twenty people and not much cash. Within weeks, there
was a crisis. The manager, a Mr Kirkpatrick, left Owen Gardner
and Sons employ and almost immediately began negotiations with
the opposition, T. Tristram Pty Ltd, and gave them the rights
to bottle our ginger ale. This special product, sold by Owen
Gardner and Sons under the name of Kirks Ginger Ale was the
mainstay of the business. ( In fact, twenty years later, it
still comprised more than 60 per cent of our total sales.) T.
Tristram began selling Kirks Ginger Ale under the T.T. label.
Consequently, my father immediately placed an injunction on Mr
Tristram, and T. Tristram Pty Ltd.
     I can remember, at that time, there was no peace in our
home. A new baby, Fabian, coupled with the sad death of his
twin, and a new venture which had cost everything, as well as
an impending litigation suit with a much larger company, made
the situation at home very tense. I reckon my father (and I
suppose my mother) had no sleep at all.
     The best legal brains in Queensland were hired. Tristrams
had Mr McGill, KC and Mr Real. We had Mr Macrossan and Mr
McLaughlin. (I later married Mr Macrossan's daughter.) The case
was brought on fairly promptly before Mr Justice Edward
Douglas, and RJ won his case with damages of  £1,000, plus
costs.
     We all know the old adage about winners, how they can
laugh and the losers cry. Suffice it to say that the publicity
given to the litigation helped re-launch Kirks as a brand and
sales increased almost exponentially. The damages of £1,000
were like a real transfusion. Les Walmsley, my father's foreman
(and later works manager), told me that from then on, they
purchased sugar by the ton lot instead of by the bag, bottles
by the 100 gross instead of by the dozen, and all the trucks
had their tanks filled with petrol every night.

