By Richard Wallace GJ in Casualty  

It was high summer and the brief holiday was over. Nobody
envied GJ. For the next three months his rostered job was
senior resident in charge of casualty. There were two new
graduates also assigned to casualty. They both dismayed GJ -
one, the worst product of one of the more exclusive private
schools and a persistent name-dropper, seemed little interested
in the hurly-burly of casualty. The other was a lanky,
bespectacled lad, loose-limbed and seemingly double-jointed all
over. He was extremely earnest, totally without humour and was
a walking encyclopaedia of medical knowledge. However, GJ was
uncertain as to whether he had a complete lack of common sense
or was merely green and inexperienced. These two new casualty
residents soon had a chance to prove themselves.
     The heat had been steadily building up. The sun glared in
blazing triumph from a burning sky, and paths, roads and
buildings absorbed and flung back the heat. The temperature was
103 degrees Fahrenheit with the prospect of worse to come. And
the change did come, not a cool change, but a searing north-
westerly wind carrying the dust of the inland right over the
city. In hundreds of small rented rooms, or in tightly closed
little houses, elderly people sat. Hardly any possessed air-
conditioners and few could afford electric fans. So ambulances
began to bring them in to casualty suffering from hyperthermia.
In one day, eight arrived. The next, eighteen. They were all
semi-conscious, confused and murmuring, and their temperatures
were nearly always well over 104 degrees Fahrenheit. One old
man was brought in with a temperature of 109. He was pallid and
looked near to death. He mumbled about the cold yet when you
touched him it seemed he was burning with an inner fire.
     The heatwave lasted for ten days. At the end of that time
forty-two elderly patients had been admitted to the wards.
Three had died. But it was not the heat alone, nor over-
clothing in unventilated rooms that had brought the old people
to hyperthermia and to the door of death. On bedside tables and
on mantel-pieces were the small bottles of tablets the elderly
victims had taken religiously in daily ritual, following the
instructions on the labels. Most of these tablets were either
digitalis, for heart failure, or diuretics, tablets designed to
drain away excess fluid in the body through the kidneys in
people whose weakened hearts could not cope with it. In doing
so, much of the body's natural supply of sodium and potassium
are taken out too. The cramps, tiredness and weakness so often
complained of by elderly people are considered normal and the
sort of thing one just has to put up with at that age. In fact,
these complaints could be due to the tablets. In a searing
heatwave such as that which we were experiencing, sodium was
vital for health.
     If anything, more sodium should be taken to make up for
the loss through the skin in sweating but, as GJ put it, `These
poor things came in as dry as wooden gods and even though they
couldn't eat much they thought they were doing the right thing
by taking their tablets because nobody ever told them they
shouldn't'. So in fact GJ and his team had two problems on
their hands: the first was that of hyperthermia; the second was
that of extreme dehydration.
     To treat simply for hyperthermia and set up an intravenous
saline drip would certainly produce acute heart failure. As GJ
replied to the student who suggested this, `You might as well
just belt them on the head with a mallet'. Balancing the two
conditions was a feat of medical skill. GJ was praised for his
work by the senior physician and for the first time in his
life, appeared to be completely at a loss for words. Blushing
furiously, he tried hard to get away.


But all the rushing of the heat emergency was a bit much for
the Gilded Youth. It didn't fit in at all with his conception
of the practice of medicine. After four weeks he succeeded in
arranging a transfer to one of the quieter parts of the
hospital. He was replaced by Dr Maria Pilar Perez.
     Dr Perez was a recent arrival in the country, a South
American, a refugee from the regime of a military dictator. In
some small way her husband had criticised the government. He
now languished in an obscure provincial gaol. Dr Perez had been
lucky enough to escape with her young son and was filling in
the necessary year of hospital work in Australia before she
could be registered. She said little and smoked incessantly.
Her arrival brought a sudden change in the atmosphere of the
casualty department. Although her training and her work were of
the first order, she was not the sort of person you could talk
to. In her presence we all felt awkward, immature, gauche. Her
dark hair was always swept back tightly and she invariably wore
dark clothes. Despite her gentleness of manner and her soft
voice there was an almost tangible atmosphere of tension around
her. It was as if a rage too deep for verbal expression was
building up in power and ferocity for the moment when it would
burst out. I was too ashamed to admit to myself at the time
that I was deliberately avoiding her. Yet she needed help so
badly. It came as a surprise to realise that this woman with a
face that mirrored the anguish of an El Greco madonna was only
twenty-eight. She had friends who often waited for her to come
off duty, dark-eyed, silent people, people from her own land.
She was a communist.
     Most recently graduated doctors tended to regard the
hospital as the ultimate in every form of medical practice. But
in the hospital one was protected, cloistered. It was easy to
speak, as many did, of medicine as being merely an intellectual
discipline. Protected by the kindness and courtesy of the
hospital, by cleanliness and the all-pervading smell of floor
polish and antiseptic, the harsh features of the world were
ignored or glossed over by medical terms which somehow made
them seem not quite so bad. For example, if somebody happened
to be ill because of mistreatment by a doctor or the improper
use of drugs, we called it `iatrogenic'. Only from casualty
came a faint whiff of the outside world; of the smell of dirt
and of tired unwashed bodies and of sweat. Dr Perez carried
with her the strength of suffering and courage, a silent, dark
knowledge of good and evil. We shied away, like toddlers do
from strangers at the door, not ready to know the wider world.
     Despite the gloom her presence brought, casualty couldn't
help but stay cheerful. The laughter was very genuine when Mr
Henry Bagshaw arrived heralded by the frantic ringing of
ambulance bells. He was a mess. He had the unusual combination
of a fine collection of jagged cuts on his bald head and an
equally dramatic collection of deep cuts on his bottom. All of
these had been bleeding freely so at first he looked much worse
than he really was. He was very angry and kept demanding to see
his wife.
     The full story did not emerge until the following day. It
seems what happened was that Mr Bagshaw, a beer-gutted, bearded
man, had just returned home from the factory. He marched into
the house, kissed his wife and then passed through the house
holding the Sporting Globe, and headed down the winding path to
the out-house toilet. He settled himself comfortably, pulled
out a packet of cigarettes and lit one. Then, rising a little,
he flicked the match with skill down into the bowl.
Unfortunately he did not know that his wife had been polishing
the furniture that day and she had made too much furniture
polish. She had poured the excess polish into the toilet bowl,
but, being in a hurry, had forgotten to flush it. The instant
the match hit the bowl there was an almighty explosion and a
great flash of flame. Mr Bagshaw was projected vertically to
the roof where he struck his head violently on the beams, then
with feet upwards and asplay, he landed on the jagged remains
of the bowl. It took two days to cool him down sufficiently for
his wife to visit him safely! But for days he wore a perplexed
expression of hurt - the expression of a man whose world has
come apart beneath him. Nor did it help him to receive from his
mates at the pub, a beautifully ornate `Get Well' card on which
was inscribed the words `Where were you when the dunny blew
up?'.


O'Dockerty in the meantime had commenced duties in the
anaesthetic department. His immediate boss was an elderly,
experienced, and extremely short-sighted anaesthetist who
seemed to spend most of the day mislaying his spectacles,
finding them again in his pocket, polishing them vigorously,
then putting them on and peering through them with a look of
gentle benevolence. But within minutes the spectacles would
start pinching his nose so he would take them off and put them
in a different pocket. Once again he would forget which pocket
they were in and the whole business would start again. O'
Dockerty calculated that he would lose his glasses and then
find them again at least six times in the course of any
ordinary operation.
     For the first few days in the department, all O'Dockerty
had to do was to mix up solutions of thiopentone while the old
anaesthetist probed for a vein discussing all the while the
progress of his vegetable garden. It is doubtful whether the
patients appreciated this rather one-sided conversation but it
did bring an element of normality to the rather frightening
environment of an operating-theatre waiting room. On his third
day in the department, Mick arrived at lunch rather pale. That
morning he had dutifully mixed up two lots each of half a gram
of thiopentone solution. In those days this was the very latest
thing. The idea that an anaesthetic could be given directly
into a vein and work instantly, without all the choking and
gasping that went on with ether or chloroform anaesthetics,
took the medical world by storm. Because of its convenience,
doctors used thiopentone anaesthetics whenever they could and
in far greater doses than would be considered safe today. While
Mick was happily mixing up the thiopentone powder with sterile
water in an enormous syringe, the old anaesthetist, with a
tourniquet around the patient's arm, was gouging for a vein in
the back of the hand. Finally, with a grunt of satisfaction, he
announced that the needle was in place and please could he have
the thiopentone. Time was running short and the surgeon in the
theatre next door was complaining loudly about the inefficiency
of the anaesthetic department. So he squirted the whole half
gram of thiopentone straight into the needle. Much to
everybody's surprise, the patient still lay awake waiting for
something to happen.
     `Huh, must be a bad batch of thiopentone. Sure you've
mixed it right?' Mick said nothing. `Well, come on, you had
better give me the other lot.'
     So Mick handed him over the other syringe full of half a
gram of thiopentone and in that went too. The patient still lay
wide awake.
     `Am I meant to go to sleep or something?', he asked.
     One of the theatre orderlies had been looking very
intensely at the patient. He suddenly darted forward and
grabbed the tourniquet. `Here, should that thing still be
tight?' and, turning action into deed, he released the still-
tightened tourniquet The anaesthetic was sudden and profound as
one gram of concentrated thiopentone hit the circulation in an
instant. It was such a solid anaesthetic that the patient
remained asleep for two and a half hours after the operation
was completed while Mick nervously measured the blood pressure
every ten minutes and helped the breathing with a respirator
when it became too shallow.

