Ed. by Garry Wotherspoon Adrian Finds His Avalon Adrian Dixson  

Perhaps my parents were disappointed when their first and, as
it happened, their only child was a boy. When the doctor asked
my father `what are you going to call the baby?' he replied,
`Shirley.' `That might not be a good idea', suggested the
doctor, `it's a son!' So I became Adrian.
     Father was the eighth son in a family of nine boys and six
girls: Mother the eighth daughter in a family of eight
daughters and one son. All but three of twenty-four uncles and
aunts married and produced families, so I grew up almost the
youngest among dozens of cousins. One of my uncles recalled
that my father was strikingly handsome and very attractive to
women - his early photographs lend support to this claim. The
same uncle was inclined to believe that my father in his mid-
thirties married my mother, not simply because he found her
attractive and charming, but also because she belonged to a
prosperous, well-established rural family tracing its
antecedents in part to the first settlement. At all events I
passed my earliest years - the depression years - in a
secure, comfortable, middle-class Australian environment.
     My earliest recollections are set in a highly organised
suburban society where everything and everybody had its
clearly defined place and purpose. Everything happened at its
appointed time: Sunday was church and Sunday School; Monday,
washing and ironing; Tuesday, for baking cakes; Wednesday, we
visited relations; Thursday, cleaning day; Friday, shopping;
and Saturday, tennis in the afternoon and bridge at night.
     The one thing that I missed particularly was the regular
company of other children, but our daily household routine was
far from dull. I was never bored. A seemingly endless stream of
tradespeople crunched up the gravelled tradesmen's entrance to
our back door: the milkman with his trimly painted horse-drawn
cart, the postman, the grocer, the greengrocer, the butcher,
the iceman, the baker, the produce merchant, and the clothes-
prop man all called regularly. `Ragsy', my silky terrier, and
I enjoyed the friendliest relations with the tradespeople and
eagerly awaited their arrival. Each afternoon at five o'clock
we squatted in front of an old horn speaker to listen to our
favourite wireless sessions, `The Fairy Godmother' and `The
Hello Man' on 2CH. Even during the hours of darkness the sound
of footsteps and a passing flash of torchlight assured me that
the local nightwatchman was doing his regular rounds.
     My father was a quietly spoken, mild-mannered man. Cricket
and antique furniture were his lifelong interests. He entered
gladly into community activities - secretary of the local
Methodist Church, a member of both the local United Australia
Party executive and the local Masonic Lodge. He held a fairly
well-paid position in the Commonwealth Public Service. I could
not conceive of a kinder or more generous father. Unfortunately
we never became very close. Before I was very old I realised
that the sorts of things for which he wanted to feel proud of
me were mostly the things in which I excelled least.
     With dark brown hair, deep green eyes, and a very fair
complexion, my mother was an attractive woman. In contrast to
her five elder sisters, who rarely stopped talking, she was a
quiet, gentle person. She delighted in the homely arts of
crochet, flower-arranging, cooking, and playing the piano. In
the years before the war we usually employed one live-in maid
to help run a household which, with frequent visits from
country relations, often numbered seven or eight. I adored my
mother. She was the centre of my world, and the person whose
approval I most earnestly sought.
     My father's mother, Grandma Dixson, lived with us. She was
a stiffly upright and slightly redoubtable lady in her
eighties. In the ten years that I knew her I never once saw her
in anything but black - dresses, shoes, stockings, beads, hats
and gloves. Her long gowns, relieved only by a thin edging of
white lace at collar and cuffs, just touched the floor. With
her long white hair piled up she was a study in quiet dignity.
     On Saturday nights, possibly to mitigate my disappointment
at not being allowed to mingle with the bridge players
downstairs, I was accorded the privilege of sleeping with
Grandma Dixson. With great glee I clambered into her vast
double iron bedstead with its shapeless, squashy old feather
mattress redolent of lavender and musk. My prayers finished,
Grandma would regale me with recollections of her childhood in
Hampshire; riding her pony `Fanny'; building snowmen in the
fields at Christmas; visiting her brothers at Winchester
College, and the long sea voyage from London to Geelong via Rio
de Janeiro. Vividly she recalled hiding in the billowing folds
of her mother's crinoline when the seamen playfully chased her
around the deck. Her family had settled in Geelong and it was
here, when she was twenty-five, that she met my grandfather.
They settled on the Murray River where the first eleven of
their fifteen children were born. Later they took up a sheep
property in north-western New South Wales. Grandma played the
church organ in the township five miles away. To get there she
rode side-saddle. `However,' she explained, `by the time I'd
finished serving midday dinner and washing up I didn't have
time to open the five sets of gates between the farm and the
church, so I jumped them!' I listened fascinated as she
described making bread, candles, soap, and even sewing tiny
items of underwear and hats for her large family.
     From a time pre-dating my earliest recollections I found
an immense delight in dressing-up - a delight not altogether
shared by my father who was not favourably impressed when he
returned from church one Sunday morning to discover his five-
year-old son shuffling half way down the street in a pair of
his mother's high heels and long satin dress beneath a pink
flowered parasol. I shall never forget the screech of brakes as
he stopped the car and bundled me in, not at all, as I felt, in
a manner befitting my obviously dignified appearance. His
reaction to this incident made me decide that perhaps I'd be
wiser not to wear mother's old silver-beaded wedding dress on
future occasions when I went up the garden to feed the fowls.
     If my penchant for dressing up disturbed my father, he
must have been equally dismayed by my fondness for dolls. I
wanted to own dolls, dress them up, place them in furnished
dolls' houses and, possibly worst of all, tell all the visitors
about them. I daresay father's embarrassment reached its high
point when I led him into a local toy shop and, pointing to a
small brass donkey engine, inquired of the proprietor, `How
much is that dolly's bath heater?' I also revelled in playing
with toy tea sets and sewing cards - everything that he felt
a regular boy should eschew.
     Our household was dominated by a strong sense of personal
modesty. In no circumstances did anyone ever appear outside the
bedrooms or the bathroom less than fully clad. For tennis
menfolk wore long white trousers. While I clearly remember
frequent reminders that `children should be seen and not heard'
and `Money does not grow on trees', the rule that people should
never appear less than fully dressed was never stated. Very
likely this topic, like sex, was too distasteful for
discussion. I was never greatly impressed by the oft-repeated
warnings about keeping quiet or being thrifty, but the unspoken
example of personal modesty communicated itself to me with
painful intensity. The very idea of undressing, even partly, in
the presence of others became abhorrent to me. Fortunately I
felt no embarrassment on those rare occasions when I stayed
overnight with my uncle and aunt by the sea and shared a bath
with my cousin Nigel. We both relished the experience.
     Possibly because I was denied any opportunity to see the
adult body, it became for me an object of considerable
fascination. While still of kindergarten age, I remember
standing with my mother on a suburban railway station as a
Scotsman in kilts walked down the steps onto the platform
opposite. I had never before seen a man with bare knees.
Innocently, I asked my mother, `Do you think that Scotsman
might let me play with his legs?' I forget her exact reply, but
it was something like, `No darling, I don't really think so.'
     A few weeks later I discovered a new sensation which
seemed to me to be perfectly harmless. When my father was
seated I lay on the floor beside his chair and wriggled my bare
feet up his trouser legs. I enjoyed the sensation, but it soon
irritated him and he stopped the practice with `Adrian, are you
crazy? Don't be so silly. Go and play with Ragsy.'
     On Sunday afternoons I was bathed, dressed in my best suit
and bow tie, and sent off to the local Methodist Sunday School.
I quite enjoyed Sunday School. In the kindergarten, forty or
fifty little boys and girls sang hymns, listened to stories,
and marched around a circle of tiny chairs before they broke up
into smaller class groups. On one particular Sunday afternoon
our teacher, Miss Bertha Burrows, had prepared for us an Old
Testament story illustrated with a series of flip-over coloured
pictures. The story concerned reapers harvesting wheat, and
when she uncovered the first picture my mouth went dry with
excitement. Here was a field of men clearly stripped to the
waist. Never before had I seen a man wearing so little. Then
I heard Miss Burrows' voice asking, `Adrian, will you go to the
picture please and point out a reaper for us.' `Why me?' I
wondered. `Can Miss Burrows read my thoughts?' The shudder of
excitement was so intense to me as my finger touched the navel
of a painted reaper that I felt everyone must have noticed it.
My fears were needless. Nobody else appeared to be the least
stirred by the picture. But I still felt guilty. There must be
something very wrong, I felt, at finding excitement in anything
so immodest as a half-naked body.
     Although my maternal grandmother, Grandma Moresby, never
lived with us, she lived at the opposite end of our street. Her
home, `Broughlea', was much older and larger than our own. Its
wide verandas and spacious grounds, which included a tennis
court, a fowl run, and a large, disused stable, provided an
ideal playground for an imaginative five-year-old.
     Grandma was cared for by a devoted old Yorkshire maid
named Alice, who made just as much fuss of me as did her
mistress. Her long black dresses were the only sombre thing
about Grandma Moresby, who always seemed to be smiling. She
never complained if I strummed too long on the piano. Nothing
was ever a bother to her. Her household ran with seemingly
effortless efficiency. Everything from breakfast to supper
happened exactly as it was meant to, at precisely the right
time, and it was always done well. She had been a widow for
five years when I was born and her whole life centred around
her six surviving daughters, one son, and nine grandchildren of
whom I was the youngest .
     Christmas at Grandma Moresby's was the highlight of my
infant years. This was one time when I was never lonely. All
my aunts, uncles and cousins descended on `Broughlea'. If my
South African relatives also happened to be visiting Sydney, a
total of fourteen adults and nine children squeezed around
Grandma's extended dining table. A pine tree specially felled
and carted down from Pennant Hills stood in the centre of the
old stable, and we kids danced around it trying to read the
names on the dozens of presents nestling between the glass
balls and tinsel. Being the youngest I was at a slight disadvantage because
I couldn't read the names or reach high enough to examine the presents on
the loftier branches. 

