By Vera Bockmann  

   So that is how Otto and I came to be married in Hamburg
eighteen months after our first meeting.

   Imagine my delight, when at the wedding breakfast at the
Reichshof Hotel I found on the table a small Australian flag
hoisted on a tiny flag-pole. There were other surprises as
well. I had never heard of much less seen a private box in a
restaurant. As we entered the orchestra struck up Mendelssohn's
Wedding March. I was startled, but nobody stared. Beyond a
cursory glance, it was of no interest to the diners whatsoever.

   Otto's closest friend Hans Jung with his wife Metta were our
only guests, and if, on that evening, anyone had prophesied
another war between Britain and Germany, a war which was to be
so much more devastating than the previous one, we would have
laughed them to scorn. That night everyone was friendly,
stimulating and enchanting. Any misgivings I had about my
parents being so far away were easily suppressed.

   It was our night.

   I found myself hoisting the flag up and down the cute little
flag-pole and gave our guests a demonstration as to how, as
school children in Tanunda we saluted the flag every morning
before entering classes. Little did I realize that this small
emblem was to be my most treasured talisman fifteen years later
during ten days' confinement in our air-raid shelter during the
Battle of Berlin.

   The inhabitants of Hamburg all seemed to have fair hair and
very blue eyes and spoke English fluently. It was easy to
understand their precise and clipped German. I had been taught
to speak German from childhood but it was rather watered-down-
stuff compared with Hamburg German. I felt rather smug when I
found that not only could I converse in German but reap in
compliments as well. Actually it was my undoing because I did
not take the trouble of learning the grammar until much, much
later. Flattery is so easy to take, and I revelled in the fact
that everyone thought the way I spoke so very quaint.

   In 1929 the Reeperbahn, the cosmopolitan cabaret area in St
Pauli was quite overwhelming as a tourist attraction. Tourists
meant money, and they seemed to have lots of it. With the
harbour full of ships of all nations Hamburg was a mecca for
entertainment. People dined late, watching daring floor shows
or seeking establishments where very good orchestras kept the
diners listening rather than chattering.

   It was the thing to leave at about two in the morning and
go to a cheaper, smaller place where it was quite permissible
to dance on the well-scrubbed table if you happened to feel
like it. There was absolutely nothing riotous about it, law and
order were mysteriously coupled with gay abandon and laughter.
Moreover it would be misleading to say that anyone was drunk.
Probably they had all had as much as they could hold, but they
could hold it. Neither did it seem odd for someone at the table
to suddenly strike up a serious note amid all the hilarity in
order to become involved in a deep philosophical discussion at
three o'clock in the morning. Sleep was something we would have
plenty of time for later.

   It was the era of the saxophone and soft strains of music.
The current favourite was `Ramona'. Hans and I would sing it
walking from the electric train stop to where they lived,
oblivious of the time. We sang it at home and we sang it
sailing on the Elbe and Metta and Otto smiled indulgently.

   Much much later I was in Hamburg again. In the seventies,
neither Otto, Hans nor Metta were alive anymore. And yet they
were there, if not in the flesh.

   Cruising on the Elbe to Cuxhaven, I was reminded of them all
the time in a comfortably nostalgic way. At dusk I made for the
Alster Pavilion and ordered a Furst-Buckler, a very special
ice-cream. I had hardly noticed the orchestra playing until a
saxophone tuned in, an instrument so popular in 1929 but hardly
ever heard in the seventies. My emotions were aroused
immediately, augmenting the nostalgia I had surrendered to
all day. But I hadn't counted on the saxophone quietly playing
`Ramona'. My ice-cream became mingled with salty copious tears.

   Except for the rather damp climate, nothing would have
suited me better than to settle in Hamburg. The harbour made me
feel in touch with the whole world, it was lovely to hear the
sound of so many languages, and I too longed to be
cosmopolitan. But everyone spoke English to me as though they
could smell my passport.

   I had to surrender my passport to the British Consulate the
day before we were married. It was an uncomfortable
experience, making me realize that I was losing something very
precious. Being young, I lightheartedly managed to convince
myself that one nation was as good or bad as another, and where
on earth could one find more charming and lovable people than
in Hamburg. Why, even two of Queen Victoria's daughters had
married Germans. Henceforth I would be a German citizen. What
could I know then of being cut off from my own family by war,
to say nothing of the fact that, directly after the war I was
an enemy alien according to Australian rules.

   Maturing in a foreign country leaves its mark on you for
ever, whether you like it or not. It leaves you constantly
groping for a middle way and getting nowhere, very often
finding yourself a misfit, no matter where you happen to be.

   We did not settle in Hamburg as planned because Otto had
better prospects being transferred to the head office of the D
e b e g. This was an abbreviation of Deutsche
Betriebsgesellschaft fur Drahtlose Telegraphie. I considered
myself very smart being able to ripple that off my tongue
without an accent. Well, hardly any! So it was to be Berlin and
Otto had now become a land-lubber. But he never lost the
lilting gait of a true sea-faring man.

   It seemed impossible to find a suitably furnished apartment
at a reasonable price in Berlin so we decided to look around
in Potsdam. By a stroke of great luck we finally found just
what we wanted, at least for a start. Although Potsdam was not
part of Greater Berlin we could get to the west end of Berlin
in half an hour by electric train which ran every ten minutes.
The drawback was that we lived at the other end of Potsdam
which meant five minutes walk to the tram and 15 minutes to the
station. But it was worth it. From the balcony of our apartment
in Kapellenbergstrasse we could touch the enormous lime trees
which lined the street. The apartment was in a huge villa which
was occupied by aristocratic ladies on a sort of `grace and
favour' basis. Their pensions were so slender that they were
obliged to sublet. The villa itself had seen better days when
there were lots of servants and a real mistress. All that was
left of the former glory were two stuffed boars in the vast
entrance hall. But in our time, this entrance was purely for
show. There must have been some sort of unwritten rule that
this access was for `visitors only', its stair-case had lush
red carpet, even if it was a bit threadbare in places. Then
there was the extremely well-kept garden. The former butler in
pre World War I times also had a `grace and favour' arrange
ment in as much as he'd been allotted three rooms and kitchen
in the semi-basement, in return for which he was expected to
keep the garden in order. And how he lived up to that trust.
Occasionally he still buttled at weddings in other people's
houses, and a jolly fine figure he cut as he walked through the
garden gate in full regalia, no doubt in anticipation of a good
tip and a few good cigars.

   As a gardener he was a tyrant. Although he never verbally
objected to my walking along the meticulously gravelled paths
he would be after me, covering up my footsteps with his rake.
All the flower beds were edged with a slender strip of lawn
which he virtually manicured. Washing on the line was out - not
even in the back garden, which actually was just as attractive
as in the front and side of the villa. No matter how
impoverished these people were everything was sent to the
laundry. Teenagers visiting their grandmothers were expected
to carry their bicycles over the paths, while dogs could only
be smuggled into the house when the gardener wasn't looking.
But you could always reconcile him with a good cigar, no
matter how badly your visitors behaved.

   The population of Potsdam seemed to consist entirely of
elderly aristocrats. The ladies always wore hats which had
probably been in the height of fashion at the turn of the
century. Lace collars reinforced with whale-bone decorated
their throats, usually fastened with an enormous brooch. As for
their other jewellery no one asked what had become of it. I was
constantly reminded of Mrs. Gaskell's book Cranford. But
nothing was ever so Cranfordian as Potsdam. These were families
who had formerly owned large town houses as well as country
estates, run by an army of underpaid and overworked servants.
Of course everyone had a title. Some were unpronounceable and
grotesque, so was it any wonder that I shied away from using
these titles like a startled horse? Regierungsrat Geheimrat,
top secret privy councillor, it did not make any sense, to say
nothing of the Prussian military titles. It was hard enough to
say Gnadige Frau every time you addressed an older woman but it
was the easiest way out. Later I got a tremendous kick out of
being called a Gnadige Frau myself .

   They still had lots of precious objets d'art which were
hocked when need arose. Costly Dresden china adorned every nook
and cranny, the furniture was massive and rather ugly, oriental
rugs one on top of another, no matter whom you visited. It was
always like being in an antique shop. Yet, I loved these
people because they accepted me for what I was; no frills. One
was constantly reminded of Prussia and what it stood for. Even
the tram-cars in Potsdam had the Prussian Eagle woven into the
well-worn plush seats.

   One of the first lessons I had to learn was never ever to
put a cup and saucer into the laps of German ladies and expect
them to be happy about it. No matter how simple the fare it
had to be served at a table, preferably a very solid one. But
we grew to respect this Cranfordian spirit of Potsdam and
became very friendly with a family who had five young boys, the
von Gottbergs. They were the grandsons of our landlady and it
transpired that she had long ago married a Jewish gentleman
with means. But this was not important in 1929. That came
later.

   The father of the young boys was a retired general, quite a
bit older than his half Jewish wife and not at all arrogant,
yet so unlike anyone I had ever met that I was never quite at
ease with him. Otto used to give me hints on how to behave but
in the end I always reverted to being just myself, and somehow
I was accepted. As for the boys, I was like an elder sister
and thought it absolutely fantastic that they went to the same
school as the Hohenzollern princes, the sons of the former
Crown Prince.

   We often went with them to Werder, the lakeside resort with
spectacular views. In Spring the Berliners flocked to Werder to
admire the fruit blossom and get drunk on strawberry wine. Two large
restaurants on hilltops flanked by the lakes of the Havel offered a 
magnificent view. 

