New home for film and sound By Brian Jeffrey  

Australia's cinematic past is a rich one and the National Film
Archive in Canberra has collected and restored many of our
earliest films. Brian Jeffrey explains the difficult and
sometimes dangerous methods of restoration.

On a blustery wet evening in October 1984, a veritable who's
who of the Australian entertainment industry, together with a
few important visitors from overseas, braved the inclement
weather to drive in a convoy of vintage cars to an imposing
building in the Canberra suburb of Acton. There they joined
some 1000 other guests for an evening of celebration which
many hoped would mark the beginning of a new era in attitudes
towards the preservation of Australia's film and sound
heritage.
     The occasion was the official opening of Australia's
National Film and Sound Archive. Addressing the guests, the
Prime Minister, Mr Hawke, said:
     Australians have expressed their national identity most
     directly and most potently through the screen and sound media.
     That is what has so often made Australian films and sound
     recordings interesting and attractive to people overseas, as
     much as to Australians.
     The establishment of the National Film and Sound Archive is the
     expression in institutional terms of a need, long felt by both
     participants and observers, to guarantee the preservation and
     availability of this fragile but vital heritage. Its
     establishment is a cultural landmark for Australia.     
    So grand was the event it was difficult to believe that
only a year before the film and sound archives had been locked
in a bitter dispute with their former home, the National
Library of Australia, over allocation of staff and funds.
     The National Film Archive evolved from the National
Historical Film and Speaking Record Library, which was
established in 1937 as part of the then Commonwealth National
Library. Its stated aim was to collect `films of past and
contemporary events of historic interest, or which throw light
on our social development; a limited number of scientific and
industrial films including anthropological films; and films
illustrating the development of film making in Australia'. 
     The staff of the Library's film division, however, was
hard pressed establishing other facets of its operation,
including a central lending library for contemporary films, and
the Archive was largely neglected until the late 1950s when a
determined effort was made to build it up. Letters were sent to
every town clerk in Australia asking for publicity about the
Archive in local newspapers and on radio; every probate office
and fire commissioner received a letter asking that any film
material be brought to notice before it was destroyed or
otherwise disposed of, and the Archive's staff gave radio talks
about the work. Unfortunately, this effort had disappointing
results; material did not pour in as the Library had hoped and
most leads proved fruitless. 
     Rod Wallace, a former principal librarian in the Special
Collections at the National Library, now retired, was involved
with the Film Archive almost from its inception. Recalling the
early years, he told me: 
     One must remember, of course, that public attitudes to
     historical material were very different then from now,
     particularly in the film world. A great deal of priceless old
     nitrate film was undoubtedly destroyed in spite of all our
     efforts.
     While the task of rounding up old footage was an arduous
one, the problem of preserving the recorded films was no less
daunting. Storage of the highly inflammable film has always
been a problem. Rod Wallace recalls:
     For many years we occupied an old explosives depot some
     miles out of Canberra, in the bush near the Mugga Quarry. When
     we had to vacate that site, the nitrate was jammed into a small
     explosives shed near another quarry on O'Connor Heights. From
     there, it went to an ammunition shed - next door to the
     explosives! - at Duntroon Royal Military College, then to a
     wooden shed at Harman Naval Station, and finally to the only
     proper vault we ever had, behind the Australian War Memorial.
     But in the War Memorial vault it was so cold in winter that we
     could only work for a quarter of an hour before we'd have to
     come out and sit in the sun for a while.
     In 1972 the nitrate holdings were transferred, yet again,
to an explosives shed in the Sydney suburb of St Marys. They
remained there until 1981, when the Archive acquired a modern,
air-conditioned storage vault of its own at Mitchell, a Canberra
suburb, to house the most valuable and delicate items in its
huge collection.
     During this entire period, the nitrate holdings were being
transferred to modern acetate film as quickly as finances would
allow, since the nitrate is not only highly inflammable but
also deteriorates chemically to the point where it becomes
worthless.


In the early days, established preservation procedures, such
as they were, sometimes proved inadequate and a certain amount
of ingenuity was called for. One item recovered, Raymond
Longford's feature film, The Romantic Story of Margaret
Catchpole (1911), presented special difficulties. Rod Wallace
recalls:
     The first two reels were found in the possession of a
     schoolteacher in Terang, Victoria. He gave them to us to copy
     and we were naturally delighted to have even two reels of this,
     Longford's second film. But a period of extreme frustration
     ensued as we tried all available laboratories seeking to have
     a negative made from the precious reels. I can recall
     telephoning one laboratory and pleading with them to have a try
     even if it cost more than usual. But none of the laboratories
     could get the badly shrunken film through their printers .
     Our troubles were mentioned to a good friend of the Library, Mr
     Alf Harbrow, who was a film pioneer. For the cost of raw film
     stock only, he offered to turn an old projector into a printer
     and print the film frame by frame in his home. It was a heroic
     offer since there were over 10 000 frames.
     Two months later we had our negative which, considering the
     state of the original, was much better than we had hoped. Not
     only had Mr Harbrow printed it frame by frame, but he had risen
     at 3 am on an unknown number of mornings to avoid the summer
     heat's effect on the developing solution which he kept cool in
     the bath!
     As confidence in the Film Archive's work grew, and
attitudes changed, film companies began to donate prints of
their films or sell them at cost price on condition they were
not shown commercially. An early donation of great significance
was that of some 600 000 metres of Australian newsreels made
by Cinesound and Movietone over the 23 years to 1951. The film
was donated by the directors of the production companies
concerned.
     In addition to the films themselves, the Archive collected
stills, scripts, documentation and memorabilia relating to the
cinema not only in Australia but also in other countries. At
the time the collection passed to the National Film and Sound
Archive, it contained 55 000 film and television productions,
500 000 stills, 30 000 posters and 6000 film  scripts.
     The National Sound Archive had its genesis in 1973, when
the National Library took over the bulk of a private
collection - some 30 000 recordings - as the basis of a
national collection and appointed its former owner, Mr Peter
Burgis, to guide the Archive's future development.
     For many years the Library concentrated on gathering as
many recordings as it could, regardless of their content or
origin. Peter Burgis made regular field trips to search through
unwanted material from radio station record libraries and dusty
corners in secondhand shops, just as he had done when putting
together his original collection. Other material flowed in from
record producing and manufacturing companies, members of the
Federation of Australian Commercial Broadcasters, and private
individuals.
     Like his contemporaries in the Film Archive, Peter Burgis
has many a story to tell about `hits and misses' associated
with building up the national collection almost from scratch.
     During one field trip I visited the George Patterson
     Advertising Agency in Sydney and discovered, way down in the
     `dungeons' below street level, a collection of several hundred
     recordings of drama and musical programmes from the 1940s and
     1950s, including a number featuring Jack Davey, Bob Dyer,
     George Wallace and similar personalities, and various wartime
     programmes. The collection was retrieved with the cooperation
     of the agency and today is considered one of the best the
     Archive has acquired.
     On another occasion in the mid 1970s I was told by the manager
     of a large production company in Melbourne that I was too
     late; they'd already sent the company's large archive of some
     seven tonnes of recordings to be melted down by a firm which
     could reclaim a certain chemical from them. While we were
     drowning our sorrows over a cup of tea in his office, he
     realised that, although the other company had been supposed to
     make progress payments as the recordings were melted down, he
     couldn't recall hearing from them. So he rang them and
     discovered that because of pressure of other work, the melting
     down hadn't even been started, although the recordings had been
     standing ominously close to the smelter for six months!
     Needless to say, I collected them shortly afterwards.
     One collection I missed, however, consisted of 20 000 to 30
     000 transcription recordings of programmes from Australian
     radio's `golden days'. It was broken up for use as a base for
     road construction shortly before I enquired about it.
By the beginning of this decade, the mass of material collected
by the then Music and Sound Recordings Section of the National
Library - which included 100 original music manuscripts 65,000
music scores and 350 000 sound recordings - threatened to
swamp available resources. Less than 1.5 per cent of the sound
recordings had been catalogued, for example, and it was
estimated that a five member task force assigned to assist
temporarily would take 14 years to get the situation fully
under control. Even more disturbing was the absence of a
preservation programme to safeguard the collection's many
fragile items, a significant number of which were
deteriorating beyond redemption. Members of the public were
disappointed to discover that resources would not permit
liberal access to the collection, especially for recreational
listening.
     Public concern over the condition of both the film and
sound archives mounted until pressure forced the Government to
act. The Prime Minister, Mr Hawke, announced at the 25th
Australian Film Awards in September 1983 that the Government
had decided to support the National Film Archive `to guarantee
the preservation of Australia's film heritage'.
     Despite the early emphasis on the well-being of the film
archive, staff of the sound archive supported the groundswell
in the hope, correctly as it turned out, that both archives
would be seen as inter-related and that what was good for one
would inevitably be good for the other. The sound archive was
hardly forgotten for long, especially after the Canberra Times
of 7 October 1983 reported that the National Library
administration was considering disciplining Peter Burgis, over
a letter he had sent the Prime Minister in which he publicly
criticised the condition of the collection .
     In April 1984, the Minister for Home Affairs, Mr Barry
Cohen, announced the Government's decision to establish a
National Film and Sound Archive, to make it administratively
independent of the National Library and to provide it with
increased resources in the form of staff, funds and equipment.
A few months later, he announced that the Archive's new home
would be a handsome neo-classical building classified by the
National Trust which, at the time, housed the Institute of Anatomy.
     The building's art deco features are an ideal complement to 
the Archive's treasures, and already its heavy wood and glass
display cabinets house memorabilia, posters and various items 
associated with both the film and sound collections.
     Obviously, the Archive's separation from the National Library 
did not solve all its problems overnight; limited resources and 
the need to meet a variety of short term demands associated with 
the move to its new headquarters continue to impose restrictions 
in access to its collections.

