Aboriginality in the art of Byram Mansell by Martin Terry  

Considered somewhat beyond the artistic pale by his
contemporaries, it is time to reassess Mansell's contribution,
through his interest in Aboriginal art themes and styles,
not only to the development of a uniquely Australian art form,
but also to an appreciation of Aboriginal culture.

   WITH AN ever-increasing number of exhibitions and publications
the art of Sydney in the 1940s and 1950s is becoming more
thoroughly documented and understood. As part of this reappraisal
a timely retrospective exhibition of the art of Byram Mansell, who
died in 1977, was held at the Woolloomooloo Gallery, Sydney in
1985.
   Mansell, born in 1894, grew up in Sydney's eastern suburbs, the
son of a factory owner. From 1911-1912 he studied engineering at
Sydney Technical College which, being overlooked by Lucien Henry's
waratahs and other Australian motifs, would have been his first
experience of the applied arts being combined with Australian
themes. In 1914 he studied at night at Julian Ashton's Art School,
followed by a period in 1921 at the Academy of Art, Honolulu. He
later attended the Academie Julian in Paris in 1922, before
returning to the United States of America where he settled in Los
Angeles.
   Little is known of this period, although like most living in Los
Angeles hope to do, he worked for the film studios and as an
interior designer. On the basis of sketches now in the Australian
National Gallery, and The songbird, reproduced in the June 1926
issue of ART in Australia, it is possible to speculate that these
interiors, rather than being in fashionable proto-modernist style,
were of a more retrospective kind, examining Art Nouveau and the
work of Tiffany and others.
   Mansell returned to Australia in 1930 and while executing the
occasional interior commission, such as some native flora
decorations for the Wintergarden Theatre (circa 1939) at Brisbane,
he would have probably remained a rather obscure personality, had
it not been for his discovery of the power of Aboriginal art.
   His interest in the Aborigines was not in itself exceptional;
Aborigines had after all featured in the art of Australia's white
culture since Sydney Parkinson portrayed Two of the natives of New
Holland advancing to combat.
   However, it was another matter to be interested in aboriginal
art. Margaret Preston is often credited with being the first white
artist to be impressed, her article, `The application of Aboriginal
designs', being published in 1930. Preston's awareness however was
perhaps more fortuitous than inspired, for coloured reproductions
of Aboriginal art had been available from at least 1904 when The
Northern Tribes of Central Australia by Baldwin Spencer and F. J.
Gillen had been published. The Arunta by the same authors was
published in 1927 and in 1929 the exhibition `Australian
Aboriginal Art' was held at the National Museum of Victoria. The
catalogue contained many illustrations of Aboriginal art, two
being in colour.
   While Preston was to travel to Central Australia, Mansell saw no
particular reason to eschew Killara for the primitive safari.
Rather, the specific inspiration for him was a set of photographs
sent him by Charles P. Mountford, leader of an ambitious
expedition to Arnhem Land in 1948 which was sponsored by the
Commonwealth, the National Geographic Society and the Smithsonian
Institute. Its two-volume report was published in 1956. From about
1949 however Mansell was absorbed by Aboriginal art themes,
responding not only to their blend of narrative power and design,
but also to Aboriginal art's ability to both represent and express
spiritual values. As he explained, `Every Stone Age painting tells
a story and every design has a meaning, meanings that western
artists are often unable to express.'
   Aboriginal art in the 1950s also became increasingly appreciated
in nationalistic terms, as something ancient and indigenous opposed
to the internationalism of the period. A contemporary article
discussing Mansell felt that `Australia is coming, largely through
this new art form, to a realisation that the Aborigine has a
culture of his own, well worth the white man's study, even among
the distractions of the atomic age'.
   Mansell himself in discussing a barbecue set that had been
commissioned for an American's `Australiana room' remarked that `It
is important to the growth of Australian culture that we strive to
develop typical Australian arts and crafts. Otherwise in the next
century or so we shall find the influx of old European arts and
crafts being sponsored here by New Australians will swamp our
national culture'.
   The isolationist theme was echoed by Joseph Burke who contended
that, `With a Stone-Age culture surviving on her soil, and proximity
to tribal societies on the north and east, Australia need not look,
like Europe, to the museum for the inspiration of the primitives'.
   Mansell was to express his new-found interest in paintings,
murals and decorative arts. He had been painting professionally
since about 1921 when, in Honolulu, he executed flower paintings on
glass and lacquer. In the mid-1930s his work reflected the more
conservative qualities of Australian art - Elioth Gruner-like
portrayals of Palm Beach and Heysenesque studies of the Macdonald
Ranges. These stylistic uncertainties were resolved by the
discovery of Aboriginal art.
   Mansell executed few large works although his 1949 Sulman entry
was an exception. It demonstrates not only his use of various
styles - X-ray figures with the more representational treatments of
the Oenpelli region combined with Western perspective - but the
literalness of his approach, the legends that fascinated him being
carefully and comprehensively described.
   Mansell's affection for Aboriginal art led him to work with
ersatz Aboriginal materials. In his smaller works he used a parrot
feather as a brush, natural pigment (red from Bowral, yellow from
a local railway cutting) and cactus juice as his binding agent.
(The Prickly Pear Commission ordered him to destroy his well-tended
specimens.) These works have an attractive, taut, graphic power,
a simplicity of conception and richness of colour which was ideal
for the expression of Mansell's beliefs.
   The most public acknowledgement of Mansell's interests was the
extensive number of mural commissions he received. Murals at their
best are an equal blend of architecture and art and today, when
they are used almost solely as doctrinaire instruction, the
extensive use made of them in the early 1960s seems almost
touchingly naive. Mansell was popular with Sydney's local
councils, executing murals for the Lindfield Library, Willoughby
Council Chambers and a park in Camden.
   His murals were also seen further afield. In 1953 Aborigines
fishing at the Kosciusko Chalet was entered in the Sulman Prize.
(Eric Smith was awarded the prize for a work at Berrima Gaol in
1956.) A large mural, measuring over five by seven metres, based on
legends about Taree, was constructed for the local Commonwealth
Bank and, while there, Mansell executed a decor for the Elite Cafe
In 1957 Mansell was commissioned to do another mural, painted on
caneite, of Yondi raising the sky - the legend of the boomerang for
the Boardroom of the Hebrew University.
   Mansell had been Australia's first Boy Scout, enterprisingly
founding his own troop: 1st Bellevue Hill. Mindful perhaps of the
Scout Guild motto `Always a Scout', he gave, in 1966, the mural
Kangaroo Hunt (91.44 x 182.88cm) to a sister organization in
Denmark.
   In similar vein was his Gift to Australian Youth for the Sydney
Police Boys' Club at Woolloomooloo, 1961. Its swarming Aboriginal
motifs and animated atmosphere is a fine demonstration of
Mansell's mural style and his ingenuous hope that a familiarity
with a clarified, accessible expression of the atmosphere of
Aboriginal art would be of cultural value to contemporary
Australia.
   The third aspect of Byram Mansell's career was his interest in
the decorative arts. He had been interested in fabrics at least
since 1930 when he opened a textile studio in Elizabeth Street,
Sydney, but his most attractive work is from the 1950s. His
scarves, a number of which were exhibited at David Jones in 1953,
run through a range of styles, from an emphasis upon floral motifs
to representational views of Aboriginal life, the spearing of fish
for example, and other more abstract motifs. Others are in a looser,
semi-X-ray style, blending with the attenuated linearity of Mimi
figures to produce in a fishing scene one of Mansell's most
handsome fabric designs.
   Like the best designers of the period such as Frances Burke who
also used locally-inspired motifs, Mansell realized that the fabric
medium required a boldness of design and colour to be effective and
that the designs needed to be integrated with the medium, not
applied to the surface. These principles were used in his other
excursions into the decorative and applied arts such as the
intarsia panels for the Commonwealth Bank in Martin Place, coffee
tables and a wide range of ceramics where grass, trees and leaves
were abstractly suggested. Later his ceramics designs became more
eccentric with, for instance, tiled planters like crazy paving and
rather peculiar mushroom-capped ceramic fountains.
   Mansell's wide-ranging interests are suggested by his tapestry
Legend of the boomerang, made in France, a Mulga wood table of his
design and a silk square Sky and the boomerang, representing
Australia, which was given to the Queen.
   Mansell adopted a popular course. He was happy to be interviewed
by Pix and Woman's Day and felt no embarrassment at executing work
for the Albury-Sydney Express, or the Empress of Australia. Like
his contemporary, Douglas Annand, he was considered somewhat beyond
the artistic pale and was until recently unrepresented by public
institutions.
   In contrast to Preston's carefully crafted asides, Mansell's
interest in Aboriginal art was direct, largely unmediated by
theories. It is an uncomplicated view of a complex culture but
largely in keeping with the temper of his time, a period, for
example, when a white artist, Alistair Morrison, could design a
catalogue cover for the important exhibition `Art of Australia
1788-1941' in Aboriginal style, or Gert Sellheim could create
Aboriginal-like postage stamps. It would be a pity if some of the
criticism levelled at Mansell in his own day became a retrospective
habit that paid no attention to his sincere efforts to encourage an
appreciation of a much neglected art.

