There's nothing new about the Accord by Jack McPhillips and Anna Pha  

   Although the wage restricting purposes and effects of the
ACTU/ALP Accord are main features of that document and are
widely known to workers, the concepts on which it is based are
even more important and their implications wider.
   These concepts include:
      2 wage levels are the main and even the sole cause of
price inflation;
      2 as such they are responsible for economic instability
and even economic crisis;
      2 workers are responsible, at least to a substantial
degree, for economic difficulties and consequently have a
responsibility to assist overcome those difficulties;
      2 workers (labour) and their employers (capital) share
common interests in the development of a capitalist economy and
in overcoming its difficulties;
      2 capitalism is an acceptable social-economic formation
and must be preserved;
      2 there is need for collaboration between labour and
capital.
   There is really nothing new in those concepts. They are
standard for representatives of capital, they have been
frequently adopted and acted upon by governments of Social
Democracy, such as the current Labor Government in Australia
and have, upon occasions, been adopted by some of the leading
bodies and persons in the trade unions.
   They have always been opposed and resisted by genuine
communists.
   Those supporters of the ACTU/ALP Accord who claim uniqueness
and exceptionalism for that document are unaware of or ignore
certain facts of history.
   As far back as 1927 the concepts of common interests and
collaboration between employers and union organisation were
advanced in a formal manner by employers in England and
accepted and acted upon by the British Trade Union Congress.
   In November 1927, Sir Alfred Mond - later Lord
Melchett - acting on behalf of a group of employers, addressed
a letter to the General Council of the TUC inviting
representatives of that body to join him and his capitalist
colleagues in discussing certain problems marking the then
current conditions in the British economy.
   His letter said : "The movement towards industrial
cooperation has recently received a great accession of strength
and there seems to be general agreement that a useful purpose
would be served by a consideration of certain fundamental
factors in industrial reorganisation and industrial relations
... The necessity of every action being taken to achieve the
fullest and speediest measures of industrial reconstruction,
therefore, impels us to seek the immediate cooperation of those
who are as vitally interested in the subject as ourselves. We
believe that the common interests which bind us more powerful
than the divergent interests which seem to separate.
   "The prosperity of industry can in our view be fully
attained only by full and frank recognition of facts as they
exist and an equally full and frank determination to increase
the competitive power of British industries in the world's
markets... That can be achieved most usefully by direct
negotiation with the twin objects of the restoration of
industrial prosperity and the corresponding improvement in the
standard of living of the population". (Trade Union Documents
by W. Milne-Bailey published by G. Bell & Sons Ltd, London,
1929, pages 253-4.)
   The address by the President to the Trade Union Congress in
that same year (1927) contained the following:
   "We all know - employers as well as Trade Unions - that the
vexatious, toilsome and difficult period through which we are
passing is a transitional period. Much fuller use can be made
under these conditions of the machinery for joint consultation
and negotiation between employers and employed. Discussion on
these lines would bring both sides to face with the hard
realities of the present economic situation, and might yield
useful results in showing how far and upon what terms
cooperation is possible in a common endeavour to improve the
efficiency of industry and to raise the workers' standard of
life. We should not be deterred by allegations that in entering
into such discussions we are surrendering some essential
principle of Trade Unionism". (Ibid. page 252.)
   Those discussions did take place over a period and were
formalised at conferences which made decisions and issued
documents.
   On July 4, 1928, "The Conference on Industrial
Reorganisation and Industrial Relations" adopted a "Scheme" and
said:
   "This Conference is convinced that the most valuable and
helpful element towards seeking a means of preventing disputes
lies in the main objective of the Conference - the strengthening
of good relations between organisations on both sides and their
recognition of joint industrial responsibility. This Conference 
believes that a broader acceptance of the responsibility of 
industry as a whole for the avoidance of stoppages of work 
should be developed". (Ibid. page 258)
   The Annual Report of the General Council to the Congress in
1928 referred to what was called "The Mond-Turner Conferences".
It referred to the difficult circumstances of the time and set
out three courses which were available to the trade union
movement. Two of those courses were based on concepts of the
class obligation of the unions. The third course was stated as
follows:
   "The third course is for the Trade Union Movement to say
boldly that not only is it concerned with the prosperity of
industry, but that it is going to have a voice as to the way
industry is carried on, so that it can influence the new
developments that are taking place. The ultimate policy of the
movement can find more use for an efficient industry than for
a derelict one, and the unions can use their power to promote
and guide the scientific reorganisation of industry as well as
to obtain material advantages from that reorganisation. Faced
with the situation that now prevails in this country, the
Council has taken the view that the third course was the only
one it was possible to take if the Trade Union Movement was to
endure as a living, constructive force". (Ibid. page 427)
   Two years after these noble (?) concepts were developed the
workers of Britain were unemployed by the hundreds of
thousands, impoverished and feeding from charity soup kitchens.
   That was not the fate of Lord Melchett or the TUC leaders
who developed the concepts of "common interests" and class
collaboration.
   But almost 60 years after "Mondism", the same concepts upon
which that infamous scheme was based are enshrined in the
ACTU/ALP Accord -.Mark I and Mark 11 - and the same class
collaboration proposals are being advanced and acted upon by
sections of the employers and sections of the trade union
leadership.
   In fact, the very views enunciated by the British trade
union leaders in 1927 and 1928 are being repeated today in
Australia by union leaders supporting the Accord.
   Attempts at this process of class collaboration were made,
in the form of proposals for a "Industrial Peace Conference",
by Prime Minister Chifley and subsequently by Prime Minister
Menzies. Both attempts were rejected by the unions.
   But "Mondism" did not die. It was revived in varying forms
in several European countries and in Britain in the 1970s.
   A widely used means of implementing the principles of
"Mondism" is the so-called Social Contract. A symposium on
trade union problems organised by the World Marxist Review in
April 1982 and involving representatives from several forms of
social contracts which had operated in Luxembourg, Denmark and
Austria.
   A report of that symposium contained in World Marxist Review
No. 12 of 1982 contained this observation on the experience in
Austria:
   "They (Government, business and union leaders) take joint
decisions on the main social and economic problems, bypassing
the elective organs. In political terms, `social partnership'
binds the trade unions to participation in spreading the
deliberate lie about there being some kind of community of
interests between capital and labour. In economic terms, it
serves capital, because it imposes on the trade union
leadership a renunciation of the use of the militant potential
of the working people in the struggle for their own economic
interests. With the `social partnership' policy is closely
connected the limitation of democracy in every sphere of trade
union activity. Its main principle is the cutting short of any
mass action in order to provide the leadership with the
conditions for conciliatory activity". (page 56.)
   The WMR discussion revealed that the unions of Luxembourg
allowed themselves to become involved in social partnership
when the economic outlook was relatively favorable. They
adopted "...an institutionalised system of trilateral
cooperation enacted legislatively. They agreed to a collective
contract, a so-called zero contract, which is (was) in force
until the end of 1983 and which says (said) that until then the
trade unions will (would) not demand any wage rises, provided
wages are automatically adjusted to the growth of prices. But
indexation has been abolished by the Government and the crisis
has induced the employers to go back on these obligations...
all these events have forced the trade union leadership to
recognise the futility of the model based on `social
partnership' and to resort to measures of protest...". (WMR,
No. 12, 1982, pp 57-8)
   The WMR discussion revealed that Denmark had an incomes
policy, in many respects similar to the ACTU/ALP Accord, which
sought to improve international competitivity and to create
conditions necessary to attract more capital investment, and
thus more new jobs. The outcome of their incomes policy,
according to the representatives of the Danish trade unions at
the symposium, and based on government statistics was a fall of
12 per cent in real wages of workers who were members of the
Central Association of the Trade Unions of Denmark and those of
Government employees dropped by 24 per cent.
   The Danish representative went on to say:
   "Consequently the characteristic thing about Denmark is that
the offensive by capital was being supported and encouraged by
the social democratic government . . .
   " Higher wages or new jobs' - that is how the employers'
union, the Central Association of the Trade Unions and the
Government see (saw) the alternative on the eve of the 1983
wage-rate bargaining, but everyone knows that the restraint on
wages did not create additional jobs and that on the contrary,
the number of unemployed since 1979 has doubled. In 1981, of
the 1.5 million unionised wage workers, 700,000 i.e. nearly one
half, variously resorted to the unemployment aid in fund. The
number of unemployed averaged almost 300,000, to which should
be added 100,000 persons who have more or less voluntarily left
the labour market". (WMR, No. 12, 1982, pp 57-8)
   The experience of workers in Britain with forms of social
contracts is discussed and to some extent documented in a
publication dealing with the ACTU/ALP Accord and published by
the South Australian Institute of Teachers (SAIT). Titled The
Prices And Income Accord SAIT Kit and dated July 1983 this
publication reproduces material from British publications 
dealing with the period of a social contract under Labor
Governments in the mid '70s. It also includes other sources of
information dealing with the Accord and a commentary by a South
Australian SAIT activist, Clare McCarty.
   The material from the English publications and Ms McCarty's
personal observations reveal a striking similarity between, and
in some respects an identity between, the activities and
statements of leading figures in the British labour movement
and persons similarly placed in the Australian movement.
   Ms McCarty points to the fact that in Britain the concept of
"social contract" was developed by the Labour Party as far back
as 1965 and observes:
   "In fact the ideas and rhetoric from 1965 onwards are
amazingly similar to what we are hearing in Australia now. The
results were devastating to the British working class".
   She says: "It (the Social Contract) began officially with a
statement of intent from George Brown, just after Harold Wilson
(now Lord Wilson) had come to power in 1965. The statement of
intent on `Productivity, Prices & Incomes' was meant to `Ensure
that the benefits of faster growth are distributed in a way
that satisfies social need and justice'".
   Despite these noble intentions that plan was dead at the end
of twelve months. It was followed, under the same Government, by other schemes
said to be aimed at controlling wage levels and prices. 

