Saturday night fever, 1986 By Anna-Maria Dell'oso  

WE HAILED the taxi outside the picture theatre. It was late
on a hot Saturday night. We were grateful to spot a Vacant sign
in a madly occupied city. Above the movie billboards, an almost
full moon added her light to the fluorescent lunacy in the
streets. Above the frenzied flashings of the pub discos, the
moon seemed to laugh.
   Below it was Saturday night fever. Herds of suburban boys
drifted along the pavements chomping hamburgers and french
fries, followed at 10-second intervals by herds of suburban
girls tottering on ankle-breaker stilettos.
   There was something touching about their brash and giggling
search for each other but, mysteriously, they never met. The
city seemed full of these male and female gangs whom not even
the moon could bring together.
   The cabbie, a young bloke with calm eyes, leaned over to
open the back door. We fell into the back. I eased off my
shoes. The screams of the post-movie crowds vanished. The last
I was to see of that Saturday night was a couple rapping on the
back windscreen as they crossed the road and a drunk who opened
his arms on the road divider, performing his pain-wracked aria
Oh Ya F-ing Bastards Ya Bastards, Ya F-ing Bastards I'll Kill
Ya.
   For, once the taxi revved up, I was in the Twilight Zone.
The driver was a player of strategic games with human flesh and
blood. He hurled the cab suicidally into the headlights of the
night. The air seemed acrid with emergency, soaked in the
peculiarly Australian emotional state of Aggro. We could almost
smell the cabbie's hatred of any object that stood between him
and pressing the gas pedal. The speedometer oscillated between
120 and zero km/h as he sped and braked on small city stretches
between lights. The cab snorted between lanes, sniffing for
openings, the slightest crack of bitumen an opportunity to
screech and burn.
   From above, it might have looked like a 20-cent Space
Invaders game in which one is casually interested in how long
the little green space shuttle can survive until the computer 
tolls for thee. Inside the renegade taxi, however, the driving 
felt about as theoretical as a violent assault and more 
pathological than the New York cab ride in After Hours. Too 
frightened to protest in case we rattled the cabbie's concentration 
and blew our Last Coins, we alighted in shock, noting the cab number.
   When we rang the taxi base to warn them of their metered Mad
Max, we were referred to a pathway of bureaucratic letter-
writing and statutory declarations. It seemed the Tron driver
was no big deal, just an average example of Saturday Night
Aggro.
   Perhaps cab drivers are particularly vulnerable to the onset
of this violence that flares during public good times, such as
New Year's Eve, the Grand Final and the end of the working
week. Indeed, taxis are part of the escalating frustrations of
Saturday nights. Since random breath-testing, they have become
as rare as vampires but as essential as blood. I dread the
hour-long hassle for the cab, as I pull on my tights and feed
the cats with one hand while I hang on to the phone with the
other, wincing through the canned music and trying to get a
better commitment than "a short delay" from the operator.
   After 30 minutes of anguish, I run out into the street where
gangs of concertgoers are hassling occupied taxis at the
lights. Yet, no matter how frazzled I feel, I wouldn't swap
seats with the cabbies. Some of the most acid wit this side of
Dorothy Parker is spilled over the taxi radio waves. I have sat
red-faced at the back of a cab cringing for Driver XXZ as he is
publicly flogged by the radioman's multi-lashed sarcasm.
   On Saturday nights, the cabs are as tense as a headmaster's
office.
   Perhaps I'm suffering inner-city burnout but I am convinced
that Saturday nights are becoming more feverish. Despite the
predictions that the video-cassette recorder would turn
Saturday nights into a cottage industry - that folks would play
their VCRs at home as the Victorians tinkled around the parlour
piano - the streets of the city are crammed. People's need to
congregate around the movie palaces and computer games halls is
more than economic or for amusement. Saturday night is a
traditional release of tribal tension. In another culture, the
fiesta and mardi gras might bring out the drunken babbling joy
in people, a kind of outrageous party. Lately, however, the
overwhelming emotion in our city streets seems to be Aggro, a
strangely pain-filled reaction to fun.
   To judge from the beery-teary faces in the streets, few
people are having the much-advertised Good Time. A happy drunk
is hard to find. Waiting for a bus after the movies in the
middle of George Street, I see a man run out from the crowd. He
has a knife in his hands and he is weeping and bellowing
"Heyyy! ... HEYYY!" From across the street, it sounds
curiously like a sobbing little boy. Yet the stainless steel
stabs the air. "Heyyy! ... HEYYY!" Passers-by look at him
bewildered. Is it a movie, or a publicity stunt? He is
virtually standing under Stallone's machine-gun poster for
Cobra. More people turn. Panic crackles across the street.
   I realise that I am frightened, that I have backed into the
glass door of McDonald's. Suddenly the man finds his enemy,
flicking the knife at him. There is an exchange of bellows and
they disappear into Chinatown.
   I think, as I wait for my bus, of friends, waitresses in an
inner-city cafe, who are convinced that Saturday nights and the
full moon are a deadly combination when severe outbreaks of
Aggro infect even the mildly sloshed. Down George Street, a
young bloke with a ripped shirt and a can of Tooheys is
dragging his plump girlfriend by the arm. She is crying and
staggering on heels and ripped stockings. Suddenly, he pushes
her away and stalks off yelling: "Get lost, Maureen - I toldya,
just piss off, til ya lose some weight ..." As the girl
staggers after him, I am infected by a fit of Aggro. "Don't do
it," I scream after her, "he's not worth it!"
   Embarrassed, I decide to walk. At the lights, two girls are
taunting an "Animal Bus" of men too full to propel themselves
home. A cab pulls up with a tired-looking driver playing a
Frank Sinatra cassette. I judge his battered Valiant as
incapable of a human Space Invaders game down Parramatta Road.
As I hop in, a creature from the Animal Bus pours beer over the
windscreen and then throws the can at pedestrians. I promise
myself that next Saturday night I will stay home and wash my
hair.

