Chapter Six Nursing home and hostel recurrent funding Introduction  

Within the context of a continuum of care, according to
assessed levels of individual dependency, funding arrangements
with respect to hostel and nursing home residents should:

2 enable a reasonable and adequate standard of care to be
  provided;

2 ensure equity for financially disadvantaged people;

2 reinforce the emphasis on encouraging maintenance of
  individual independence;

2 achieve greater equity between States on per capita
  expenditure;

2 be cost-effective for the taxpayer; and

2 create incentives for service providers to increase
  administrative efficiency.

  There is general acknowledgment that existing financial
arrangements fall short of the Commonwealth's aims in a number
of areas. In particular, the following concerns are raised by
the Auditor-General's report on an efficiency audit, the report
of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Expenditure (McLeay) and the report by the Senate Select
Committee on Private Hospitals and Nursing Homes (Giles):

2 The overall funding system exacerbates the differences
  between hostels and nursing homes by consistently increasing
  the differential between benefits for personal care in hostels
  and ordinary care in nursing homes.

2 Funding arrangements provide no encouragement for
  rehabilitation or for maintenance of personal independence.

2 The existing fees control system is complex, costly and
  difficult to administer. Fees relate to real levels of
  expenditure but not to real costs of care, and vary widely from
  nursing home to nursing home and State to State. This
  interstate variation results in substantial per capita
  inequities in benefits paid from one State to another.

2 There are serious anomalies in arrangements controlling
  profits, which the industry is increasingly less prepared to
  tolerate.

2 There is little incentive for proprietors to limit operating
  costs as costs incurred are returned as fee increases. Savings
  on approved costs cannot be retained and are reflected in
  negative loadings on fees.

2 The existing nexus between costs, fees and benefits, and the
  difficulty over time in relating fee increases to real cost
  movements, has severely reduced the Commonwealth's capacity to
  control overall expenditure on nursing homes. This problem is
  escalating. The tables on current and projected expenditure in
  Chapter Two illustrate this problem.

2 Commonwealth expenditure per bed day is higher for deficit-
  financed homes than for participating homes. But Commonwealth
  policy priorities, concerning access to nursing homes for
  disadvantaged groups, are no more likely to be met by deficit-
  financed homes than by participating homes, despite the
  additional expenditure incurred.
  The clear conclusion of all these reports, which is
supported by government policy statements, is that the large
amounts of scarce resources expended through residential
programs must be directed only to those aged or disabled people
whose needs are not able to be met through community-based care
services. Despite the huge investment of resources, residential
programs in fact cater for only a small minority of aged and
disabled people and no matter how well structured or co-
ordinated the programs, they will continue to be appropriate
for only a minority.
  The central divergence in the conclusions of the major
reports concerns the degree of Commonwealth involvement in the
program over the longer term. The McLeay report recommended a
progressive transfer of responsibility to the States, for both
residential and community care, while the Giles report
specifically rejected grants to the States in favour of program
grants administered by the Commonwealth. The Review believes
that the priority is to enhance the effectiveness of the
current programs and their linkages with community services and
that issues relating to longer term control cannot be
determined at present.

 Approaches to funding  

On the basis of the stated objectives and the conclusions of
the major reports on current problems, there are three major
elements which need to be taken into account in devising new
funding arrangements for residential programs:

2 The new system must incorporate budgetary controls over the
  funding of nursing home benefits and assistance. Under present
  open-ended arrangements the rate of growth in outlays is very
  difficult to control or to predict beyond a narrow timeframe.

2 The system must address current administrative complexities;
  funding inequities between different types of institutions and
  between States which result in significant per capita
  inequities across the program; and the existing disincentives
  for provider efficiency.

2 The new arrangements must support the proposed restructuring
  of service provision and be consistent with the broad goals of
  providing a continuum of care and discouraging premature
  institutionalisation, while allowing greater flexibility in
  planning for future rapid growth in the aged population.

  However, while there is broad agreement on the importance
of these elements in any new funding arrangements, there is no
clear-cut strategy for achieving them. The number and variety
of proposals put forward over the years have been great, but
taken in isolation most of them have adverse consequences of
varying magnitude. This has been a major deterrent to change.
Essentially, these proposals relate to four central issues
which are discussed below:

2 the continuation of growth control;

2 the nexus between costs, fees and benefits;

2 protection for financially disadvantaged persons; and

2 improvement of program efficiency within the existing   
  structure.

 The continuation of growth control  

Control on the overall number of nursing home beds, by limiting
supply, has been the most effective device used by the
Commonwealth to date for controlling costs and reducing
unnecessary admissions. At present, this is done by
controlling, through a series of planning principles, the
number of beds approved for benefit; and by prohibiting non-
approved beds in approved homes. However, restricting supply
also:

2 encourages fee increases, and hence pressure on benefits;

2 cannot ensure priority of access to highly dependent persons
  most in need of nursing care; and

2 is subject to demand pressures. 

  To be successful, it depends on:

2 means for protecting financially disadvantaged people   
  (currently fees control); and

2 admission control (currently control over the kinds of   
  people approved for benefit, but not the number).

  Removal of controls on bed growth and on approval of beds
for benefit, on the other hand, would result in an excess
supply of beds. This would:

2 allow nursing homes to compete for patients;

2 encourage provider efficiency and protect standards; and

2 restrain fee increases, allowing the lifting of controls
  on fees.

  It would depend for expenditure control on restricting the
number of people approved for benefit. This has always proven
extremely difficult. Experience in the health industry
indicates that all beds would be likely to be fully occupied,
causing:

2 pressure to procure benefits for all people admitted,     
  leading to encouragement of increasing dependency and      
  institutionalisation, and discouragement of rehabilitation;

2 increasing difficulty for people to be approved for benefit
  directly from the community, without a preliminary admission
  period in which they received no benefit; and

2 increasing admission of better-off people who could afford
  to pay fees in the initial non-benefit period, at the     
  expense of people who were financially disadvantaged.

  To be successful and meet wider Commonwealth aims for
enhanced rehabilitation and the prevention of unnecessary
institutionalisation, this form of deregulation would depend
on:

2 means for protecting financially disadvantaged persons;

2 a way to ensure that people who do not need nursing care are
  not prematurely admitted to nursing homes as a preliminary
  to claiming benefit; and

2 a way of protecting assessment mechanisms from bearing the
  full brunt of expenditure control, when their major concern
  is to make judgments about patient care requirements.

  The Review considers that the disadvantages of the removal
of controls on bed growth significantly outweigh the
advantages.

The nexus between fees, costs and benefits

The Commonwealth provides assistance to nursing home residents
so that everyone who needs this form of care can have access
to it, regardless of their means. Because 62-65 per cent of
residents are pensioners with little or no other income,
Commonwealth assistance, with the minimum patient contribution,
must be sufficient to cover the basic costs of an adequate and
reasonable standard of care for at least two-thirds of
residents.

  The present fee control system allows the Commonwealth to
protect pensioners in participating nursing homes who have
little or no other income, by striking a benefit which, with
the minimum patient contribution, covers the fees charged for
70 per cent of these beds, at the commencement of the benefit
period. In Victoria and South Australia this system does not
apply in 1986, and the proportions of participating home
residents covered at the commencement of the benefit period
were 62 and 67 per cent respectively.

  The starting point for determining benefits under this
system is the fees charged by individual nursing homes, which
in turn are approved by the Commonwealth on the basis of
allowable costs, plus a profit component. Interstate
differences are perpetuated in the range of benefit levels from
State to State. The benefit is then, essentially, a form of
cost reimbursement, rather than a payment in respect of
provision of an approved standard of care. An additional
problem is that the present system does not differentiate the
real costs of ordinary and extensive levels of care. Thus, the
approved daily fees for any participating nursing home are
always based on the total per diem income of the home divided
by the number of beds, and the differential between ordinary
and extensive care fees is always the standard $6 per day
regardless of the cost structure of the home.

  The main advantage of breaking the nexus between costs, fees
and benefits would be that benefits could be standardised and
could be determined by some other means more consistent with
Commonwealth aims to:

2 control expenditure growth;

2 achieve greater equity between States; and

2 reflect the actual costs of ordinary and extensive nursing
  care for residents with different levels of dependency.

  In effect, such a change would be consistent with the
introduction of program grants. The essential features of
program grants are that participating organisations agree to
provide a specified level of service in return for receiving
a specified level of grant, and a specified level of patient
contribution. The advantages of such a system are its
administrative simplicity and the incentives it provides for
efficient management by proprietors of nursing homes. The main
problem is that it assumes that all nursing homes could be
operated within a common cost structure, irrespective of size,
location, age etc. In practical terms, the difficulty in
introducing program grants, or simply setting benefits in some
way other than on approved fees, lies in the basis on which the
grant should be calculated.

  The W.D. Scott study on the Cost of nursing home and hostel
care services (Scott, 1985) explores the notion of standard
costs in developing program grants - standard costs being
expressed as the number of units of input required to produce
a unit of output. In the nursing home context, output measures
for deriving standard costs would be the level of patient care
deemed reasonable and adequate by the Commonwealth for ordinary
and extensive care residents.

  W.D. Scott pointed to two approaches to developing standard
costs:
2 The first of these would develop standard costs from      
  existing costs. This assumes the existence of a consistent 
  service level, and hence a similar cost structure across  
  nursing homes. For instance, if there were consistent     
  service levels for food and linen services, then a standard 
  cost could be struck, based on existing costs for these   
  services.

2 The second approach would base standard costs on an      
  independent point of reference. Thus, the Commonwealth would
  specify a standard output for all aspects of service such
  as nursing hours per patient, food and laundry services,  
  light and heat etc. and define the levels of input required
  to meet these standards.

  W.D. Scott preferred the second approach, concluding that
there was insufficient consistency in existing costs to
generate standard costs. However, they recommended a phased
introduction to program grants:

2 Phase I would use current average costs as an interim model
  for deriving the standard cost for various aspects of     
  nursing home operations. During this period, homes varying substantially from the average would be identified and the range of costs gradually compressed.

