By Dr Terry Carney and Prof Peter Singer Chapter Five Options in caring for and protecting intellectually
disadvantaged people INTRODUCTION  

In Chapter One two competing goals in the care and protection
of intellectually disadvantaged persons (on the one hand,
maximising the freedom of the individual, and on the other
hand, protecting the welfare of the individual) were discussed.
Most programs for the intellectually disadvantaged attempt to
steer a middle course between these goals. There are several
ways of doing this, and the course chosen determines, in a
rough way, the relative weight to be accorded to each goal.
This chapter commences a more detailed discussion of
guardianship schemes, both existing and proposed.
    There are two questions to be addressed in discussing
guardianship alternatives. First, what type or model of
guardianship is to be preferred? Second, what sort of
administrative delivery structure should underpin the
preference for a particular model of guardianship? The first
question involves choosing between three models:

2 a legalistic or `substituted judgment' model which aims to
  facilitate only a person's legal functioning in the community;
2 a welfare oriented or therapeutic model which strives to
  bring a wider range of benefits to the person; and
2 a `parent-child' or developmental model which aims to promote
  the development of the individual's functioning in a range of
  areas.
    The second question involves choosing from volunteers backed
up by a co-ordinating agency, social work professionals
employed by a public or private agency, and an agency which may
seek guardianship but whose prime function is the delivery of
social services.
    Some delivery structures may be capable of delivering more than
one type of guardianship, but there are inherent limitations
which will emerge from the discussion which follows. In his
discussion of models for guardianship, McLaughlin notes that
the conflicting internal logics of the various solutions seem
to make it impossible to form a hybrid model of the best
aspects of each. 
    The field of choice is also narrowed by some practical
considerations and by the impact of principles such as that of
the least restrictive alternative.
    Some parents, for example, suggest that the law should
`automatically' continue their guardianship rights when their
handicapped offspring reach adulthood. The insuperable 
practical barrier to such a scheme is that of classification;
intellectually disadvantaged people cannot readily be
identified by their behaviour, by their history of utilisation
of specialist services, or from any public records. Most people
will not classify themselves or be universally regarded by
their close family as being disadvantaged to the degree which
would justify appointment of someone as their guardian. Even
where this identity is established, it will not generally be
known to any public agency. And where an agency does have a
record - such as would be the case where services have been
supplied to assist in say the education of a disadvantaged 
child prior to adulthood - it does not follow that all (or 
indeed any) of these people require guardianship. This is 
really the nub of the matter, for it squarely raises the 
question of policy.   
    Assuming for the moment that the class of people to be
covered could somehow be established with precision (and
precise it must be if the law is not to have the effect of
stripping competent non-disadvantaged adults of `self
guardianship'), there would still be the question of the
application of the principle of the least restrictive
alternative. For automatic guardianship would, at worst, be
plenary guardianship or, at best, over-generous guardianship.
One cannot tailor a suit for a client whose measurements and
needs remain unknown; equally, it is not possible to limit the
powers of the guardian to the bare essentials necessary for
that person if the law is required to be `automatic' in its
operations. Guardianship would inevitably be of the `off the
peg' variety; and it would be manufactured to accommodate the
client whose needs were the most extensive. In place of least
restrictive guardianship we would be ushering in a `most
restrictive' guardianship regime; it would automatically
appoint guardians for people who do not require them, and it
would clothe many guardians with powers substantially in excess
of that required to meet the needs of the particular
disadvantaged person. 
    This chapter puts such impractical schemes to one side and
concentrates attention on those guardianship options which are
both workable and consistent with the basic guiding principles
laid down in such documents as the United Nations Declaration.
The models to be explored here result from a serious attempt
to devise workable models which are broadly consistent with
these guiding principles. One of the fundamental questions
which must, however, be addressed in this context is whether
limited guardianship should be made available. This matter is
also considered in this chapter.

 THE LEGALISTIC OR `SUBSTITUTED JUDGEMENT' MODEL Introduction  

McLaughlin and Frolik both acknowledge that the expressions
`legalistic' and `substituted judgment' may be used to describe
the same model for guardianship. The following discussion uses
the expression `legalistic' wherever possible, in order to
avoid confusion.
    McLaughlin commences his discussion of the legalistic model
of guardianship by quoting the following definition of
guardianship: 

    The term `guardianship' refers to a legally recognised
    relationship between a specified competent adult and another
    specified person, the `ward' who, because of his tender age or
    because of some significant degree of mental disability,
    judicially verified, is considered to lack legal capacity to
    exercise some or all of the rights pertaining to adults
    generally in the country of which he is a citizen. The guardian
    is specifically charged with protecting his ward's interests
    and, for certain purposes, exercising essential rights on his
    behalf.

    This definition, says McLaughlin, makes it clear that
guardianship is essentially a legal device by which:

i)  the exercise of certain rights is transferred from one
    person who lacks mental capacity to another person with legal
    capacity, and 
ii) certain duties of protection are imposed on the person to
    whom the rights are transferred.

    In other words, the guardian becomes a `substitute
decision-maker' for the person subject to the guardianship, and
is given legal responsibility for the protection of that
person.
    What group of intellectually disadvantaged people does the
substituted judgment model of guardianship address?
    McLaughlin has identified three broad groups in relation
to which the question of a need for guardianship might arise.
The first group includes severely and profoundly intellectually
disadvantaged individuals, among others, who have a need for
valid consents to be given to medical procedures and other
forms of treatment, therapy and rehabilitation, and for
assistance in matters of day-to-day living, because they do not
have the mental capacity to understand the information that
underlies the validity of consents. This group most clearly
requires guardianship to enable its members to interact legally
with the world, and its members frequently require protection
as well since they are very dependent upon others for even
basic life functions. They have extremely limited communication
skills, paid human service workers are often the only people
aware of their existence, and they are often housed in
institutional settings where individual needs give way to
institutional maintenance.
    The other two groups identified by McLaughlin are: those
mildly and moderately intellectually disadvantaged persons who
do have the mental capacity for forming legal relationships,
but who exercise that capacity in a way that is perceived by
other people as not being in their best interests, probably
because they just cannot keep pace with the demands of modern
life; and those intellectually disadvantaged adults who are in
situations where there is a risk of physical, sexual or
economic abuse or exploitation from which they are unable or
unwilling to extricate themselves.
    The legalistic model addresses neither of these groups.
Members of the former group primarily require guidance and
counselling. However, proponents of the legalistic model argue
that guardianship is not an appropriate vehicle for the
provision of such services, because they can be provided
without the imposition of authority and resultant restriction
of rights that guardianship entails. Guardianship according to
the legalistic model is not a social service; it should only
be used where a substitute decision-maker is needed to
facilitate legal relationships.
    In relation to the latter `at risk' group, McLaughlin
argues that guardianship should not be used to deal with issues
of neglect, abuse or exploitation, and recommends that society
should be more ready to make use of criminal sanctions against
those responsible for such situations. After all, that is how
people are normally protected in our society. 
    The legalistic model for guardianship is based on the
presumption that everybody is entitled to exercise all the
rights generally available to all persons within the
jurisdiction.  Thus it has been said that:

    ... every human being should be presumed to have [the basic
    rights of privacy established by the Supreme Court of the
    United States] unless someone can show an almost certain
    probability of disastrous consequences if he exercises them ...
    There is a fundamental right to be left alone, a right to be
    allowed to succeed or fail, a right to ignore gratuitous
    advice, a right not to tell every problem to the social worker
    and a right not to answer the door.

    Persons who lack sufficient mental capacity to participate
intellectually in certain legal acts, such as the giving of a
consent which waives the right not to be touched by another
person, may not engage in these legal acts. This is a serious
deprivation of the legal right of such people, but McLaughlin
argues that it is necessary `if the enforcement of legal
relationships is to have any moral foundation'. 
    The dangers of over-protection have already been referred
to. One way of avoiding them is to make use of limited or
partial guardianship schemes. This form of guardianship is
discussed in more detail later in this chapter. The main aim
is to take away legal decision-making power only in those areas
of a person's life in which he/she has been found to lack legal
competence. It is a sophisticated modification of traditional
guardianship schemes, and is directed towards implementation
of the principle of the least restrictive alternative. With its
emphasis on legal functioning, it would fit in well with the
legalistic model.
    The legalistic model seeks to deal with the dangers of
over-protection and abuse of control by restricting the size
of the group on which guardianship may be imposed and the
purposes for which it may be used. According to McLaughlin, the
appointment of a guardian under the legalistic model is
effected by a court in a juridical proceeding, and the guardian
is personally subject to the supervision of the court. 
However, in recent times there has been support for
guardianship tribunals composed of experts in the field of
intellectual impairment and incompetence, and chaired by
lawyers, to be placed in charge of guardianships.  If the
principles of the legalistic approach to guardianship were set
out in the enabling legislation as goals for which such a
tribunal should strive, there seems to be no reason why it
could not administer a legalistic type of guardianship.
    Because of the serious deprivation of legal rights under
guardianship, proponents of the legalistic model argue strongly
for extensive due process and evidentiary safeguards in order
to minimise infringement of the rights of persons who are
capable of exercising legal rights themselves. Such arguments
accord with the views expressed in paragraph 7 of the
Declaration on the rights of mentally retarded persons. 
    In theory, there are two main possible effects of extending
due process and increasing evidentiary standards. First, there
might be a decrease in the number of cases in which a guardian
is unnecessarily appointed. This is obviously a good effect,
because it reduces the number of people who are unjustly
deprived of their liberty. Second, there might be an increase
in the number of cases where no guardian is appointed although
one is necessary for the welfare of some person. This may be
a bad effect. However, advocates of the legalistic approach
believe that the good effect outweighs the bad, on the basis
that we are all better off in a society which minimises the
denial of liberty to its members. 

