CHAPTER 7 PRINCIPAL FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS  

1. The nature of this investigation was such that most of the
fundamental evidence and other material provided to the
Commission was confidential in a commercial sense. Many
submittors sought directions prohibiting the publication of
evidence submitted to the Commission and of matters contained
in documents lodged with it, in accordance with the provisions
of s. 12(2)(b) of the Inter-State Commission Act 1975 (Cth).
All such applications were granted. Two consequences followed:
first, the Commission is satisfied that the information it
gained, and which was necessary to enable it to make relevant
findings of fact, was more comprehensive than otherwise would
have been the case; second, the Commission has not been able
to make public certain facts which support its conclusions, and
in some factual matters there is a resultant apparent lack of
precision and clarity. Nevertheless, the Commission made the
confidentiality directions because it was satisfied that it was
desirable to do so in the public interest, irrespective of the
effect on the overt comprehensiveness of its report.

2. As stated in Chapter 2, the Commission placed a strict
interpretation on its terms of reference, which it considers
are confined to a comparison between the existing level of the
interstate freight cost disadvantage experienced by shippers
of non-bulk goods between Tasmania and the mainland of
Australia and the level of the disadvantage that prevailed when
the new Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme was introduced
on 1 September 1985. In making this comparison, the Commission
confined its investigation to an analysis of changes in freight
charges.

     A number of submittors raised issues which were extraneous
to the Commission's terms of reference as so interpreted: in
public advertisements (see Appendix I) it was stated; `It [the
Commission] will not be considering any policy, procedural or
administrative changes to the scheme'. Some of the extraneous
issues raised are mentioned in section 2.2 of this report, in
which the Commission has emphasised that inadequate or
inefficient methods of presenting cargoes for shipment are the
responsibility of freight forwarders and shippers, who should
not seek to rely on increased assistance payments as a solution
to problems which are within their own ability to remedy.

     As recommended in its original report, the Commission
considers that the establishment of a Tasmanian Association for
Interstate Shippers is desirable in order to assist in the
adoption of a coordinated approach to resolving the many
problems that exist for coastal shipping services.

3. In Chapter 3 the Commission has re-stated in summary form
the basic rationale of the Scheme which it recommended in its
1985 report. In particular, geographical factors such as the
distance between the place of production or manufacture and the
ultimate destination cannot in themselves justify assistance
payments. Fundamental to the existing Scheme is the concept
that the disadvantage `begins at a northern Tasmanian port' and
`ends at Melbourne', and vice versa. The Commission also has
re-stated, in section 3.3, the major factors which create the
freight cost disadvantage.

     In Chapter 3 attention has been directed to the fact that
this review is based solely on a comparison of relevant freight
charges, on the assumption that there has not been any significant 
change in the underlying causes of the freight cost disadvantage. 
Such a course is obviously appropriate in the short term, but in 
the longer term it is likely that reappraisal of the fundamental 
basis of the Scheme will be necessary in the light of changes 
which are likely to occur, with differing consequences, in the 
three relevant transport modes: sea, road and rail.

4. Chapter 4 contains a summary of the operation of the revised
Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme. In the first ten months
of the current financial year payments made under the old
Scheme and the new Scheme totalled $21.12 million. There have,
however, been some delays in the payment of claims, due
primarily to lack of familiarity on the part of claimants and
Department of Transport staff with the new documentation and
administrative procedures which became operative from 1
September 1985.

      In section 4.3, there is a discussion of the practical
result of the application of discounting of payments to large
shippers, which was recommended by the Commission in its March
1985 report. The Department of Transport has estimated that the
discounts will total approximately $1.5 million in 1985-86. The
discounting system is also referred to in section 2.2 of this
report.

5. In Chapter 5 are described the changes that have taken place
in Bass Strait shipping services since January 1985. Without
doubt, there is excess ship capacity at all ports. Evidence
presented to the Commission revealed a great variation in
estimates of the extent of this excess capacity. The Commission
considers that the most appropriate basis for such estimates
is physical operational capacity, and it has concluded that on
such a basis the extent of excess capacity is approximately
30-40 per cent.

6. In Chapter 6, the Commission presents its findings as a
result of its investigation of sea freight charges for
shipments across Bass Strait and mainland road and rail freight
charges in the period March 1985 to March 1986. The Commission
found that actual sea freight charges paid did not change
significantly between March 1985 and March 1986, except in the
case of trailers and pantechnicons, for which there was an
average decrease of 25 per cent.

     Estimates of increases in interstate road freight charges
varied between 3.9 and 7 per cent. In the case of rail freight,
estimates of increases in charges varied between 9 and 15.5 per
cent, with an average of 10.5 per cent.

7. The Commission is in no doubt that when the changes in Bass
Strait shipping services occurred (see Chapter 5), there was
a general expectation that the competition thereby engendered
would result in significant decreases in Bass Strait shipping
charges. It has been established that these expectations have
not been realised, at least at this stage.

     Clear evidence exists of a loss of trade as between some
shipping operators and, because of excess capacity (see section
5.3), a situation could soon arise in which a service will be
curtailed or withdrawn.

     There was strong consensus among the principal witnesses
that at this stage it would be premature to make any judgment
about the levels of freight charges because there has not been
sufficient time for a clear picture to emerge following the
recent changes in services. The Commission is satisfied that
this is a correct assessment.

     In most cases, published freight charge schedules are of
little relevance because their application is minimal. But one
operator said such schedules are a benchmark, and that `there
are many people who do pay the rates that are published in the
tariff'. By contrast, a witness for another shipping operator
said his company did not publicly issue a schedule of freight
charges.

     The operations manager of Union Bulkships said it would
be `extremely difficult' to estimate the difference between
published charges and so-called special charges. His evidence
was as follows:

     ... prior to 24 February [1986] it probably would not have been
     more than about 5 per cent, and that was the last freight
     increase. Since our last freight increase we have not been able
     to gain all the increases we sought and, in fact, in some
     instances we have had to reduce rates to combat prices that
     have been put in by the opposition. In fact, at the moment it
     would be fair to say that the trade in Tasmania is in a state
     of flux as regards rate structures ... On that special schedule
     you will notice that there are a number of rates which we are
     still in the process of negotiating with shippers because there
     is a situation at the moment where the trade is over-tonnaged
     and people are taking advantage of that over-tonnaging
     situation to resist freight increases, which is probably the
     simplest way of saying it.

     The evidence reveals that an unusual situation has
developed in Bass Strait services, whereby in most cases there
is specific negotiation of freight charges, either on an ad hoc
basis or, especially in the case of large shippers, by formal
agreement. Some witnesses described the situation in Bass
Strait as a `price war', but this was doubted by other
witnesses.

     One feature of current competition in the market is that
evidence has been given to the Commission of effective shipper
resistance to announced increases in freight charges; further,
there is evidence that in many cases charges are being
contained, even where costs have risen, apparently to avoid
loss of trade to a competitor.

     A number of witnesses used the words `fluidity' and
`instability' to describe the current structure of freight
charges. Most witnesses were of the opinion that an appropriate
time for a further investigation of the levels of freight
charges would be towards the end of 1987. The Commission agrees
with this view. By that time, two significant events will have
occurred.

     First, on 15 February 1985 the Transport Commission of
Tasmania entered into an agreement with Brambles Holdings
Limited. The preamble of this agreement was as follows:

     A. the Commission has for some time been operating the vessel
        M.V. "Straitsman" in connection with the conduct of shipping
        services between places within Tasmania and between Tasmania
        and other parts of the Commonwealth;

     B. Brambles desire to operate a cargo vessel in the provision
        of shipping services between Victoria and Tasmania and has
        purchased a vessel for that purpose with a view to assessing
        the requirements for the ultimate replacement of the M.V.
        "Straitsman";

     C. the Commission and Brambles have agreed to associate
        themselves in the provision of a Joint Bass Strait Cargo
        Shipping Operation serving Victoria, King Island and Tasmania
        using initially M.V. "Straitsman" and a vessel to be provided
        by Brambles.

     The agreement was for an initial term of two years from
the `commencement date', which is defined as `the date upon
which the Brambles vessel actually sails upon its first
voyage...'. This date was 1 July 1985.

     Paragraph 2.3 of the agreement makes the following
provision:

     This Agreement shall be for an initial term of two years from
     the commencement date and may be terminated at the expiration
     of such term by either party giving to the other at least 6
     months written notice in advance of its intention to do so. If
     not so terminated this Agreement shall continue in force after
     the initial term until such time as either party gives to the
     other six months notice in writing.

Paragraph 11.1 of the agreement is in the following terms:

     The Parties AGREE that prior to the expiration of one year from
     the Commencement Date they will evaluate and consult one with
     the other regarding the continuation of the Operation and the
     continuing use of the Vessels or their replacement with the aim
     of ensuring that any replacement arrangements provide for the
     continuation of a regular and scheduled cargo shipping service
     to the Port of Grassy.

     The Commission understands that the review contemplated
by paragraph 11.1 of the agreement has commenced, although not
on a formal basis. It will include options for the future of
the Straitsman, but decisions are not likely to be publicly
announced before 30 June 1987.

     For a considerable time there has been doubt whether it
was nautically practicable for the Challenger B, the vessel
used by Brambles on the Burnie-Melbourne service, to trade to
King Island. In evidence to the Commission, the general manager
of Brambles Shipping Division stated unequivocally that, after
lengthy investigation, it had been decided to make no attempt
to use the Challenger B for the King Island service.

     The second significant event which will occur in a little
more than one year is, so the Commission understands, the
negotiation of new contracts by a major shipper. The results
of such negotiations may well change the attitudes of some
shipping operators to the economics of continuing their
services. 

Firm evidence was given by some witnesses that if, for example, one vessel was withdrawn from the Bass Strait service, the likely result would be an increase in freight charges because of a reduced level of competition.

