<sample>
	<id> H06 </id>
	


	<note> 2017 words </note>
	


	<source> Gone with the winds: inquiry into meteorological services report from the
House of Representatives standing committee on expenditure  </source>
	


	<h> CHAPTER TWO </h>
	

	<h> BACKGROUND </h>
	

2.1       It is necessary both to understand the respective
roles played by the Department of Aviation (DofA) and the
Bureau of Meteorology (BofM) in the provision of meteorological
services to the aviation industry and to obtain an historical
perspective on developments leading to the need for this
inquiry.


	<h> Department of Aviation and the Bureau of Meteorology Working
Arrangements </h>
	

2.2       The Secretary to the DofA has the legal
responsibility under the Air Navigation Regulations Section 98
(1), to determine the meteorological services which are
necessary `to ensure the safe, economic and regular operation
of aircraft' in Australia.

2.3       The Meteorology Act 1955 paragraph 6(2)(b), states
that `The Bureau shall perform its functions under the Act in
the public interest generally and in particular - for the
purposes... of civil aviation'. In addition, paragraph 8 of
the Act provides that `the Director of the Bureau may, subject
to any directions of the Minister, make charges for forecasts,
information, advice ... supplied in pursuance of the Act.'

2.4       In practice the DofA specifies the requirements for
meteorological services and the BofM provides the major part
of these services and subsequently charges the Department.
`These costs are, in turn, incorporated by the Department in
air navigation charges which are levied on the aviation
industry'. Meteorological charges are formalised in an
agreement between the Bureau and the Department entitled
`Working Arrangements for the Provision of Meteorological
Services and Facilities for Civil Aviation'.

2.5       The Bureau has been providing meteorological services
for civil aviation for the past 40 years. During this period
both the funding arrangements and the charging philosophy have
been altered.   In the years 1952 to 1979 the Department of
Aviation (or its predecessors - the Department of Transport and
the Department of Civil Aviation) contributed fixed percentages
of total Bureau expenditure on both salaries and also general
expenses.

2.6       The 1976 Report of the Committee of Inquiry into the
Bureau of Meteorology, the Howson Report, recommended that:

	`The provision of any additional service e.g. to civil aviation
	and the armed forces, should be subject to a charge aimed at
	recovering the marginal cost of providing the extra service and
	associated overheads....'.

2.7       Section 7 of the 1979 Working Arrangements sets out the
agreed charging principles and a charging formula. The charging
principles are summarised in Appendix VI. It should be noted
that whilst the Howson Report refers to marginal costs the
Working Arrangements use the slightly different terminology,
directly attributable costs `...officers directly involved in
the provision of the service'.


	<h> Cost Recovery in the Department of Aviation </h>
	

2.8       Successive Australian Governments have endeavoured
to recover from the aviation industry the cost of the services
provided directly in support of civil aviation. The amounts
involved are considerable, for example, of the Department of
Aviation's budget for 1984-85, $471.5M was assessed as being
attributable (recoverable) costs. Revenue for the same period
was $282.9M comprising air navigation charges of $134.7M,
aviation fuel tax of $81.4M, and rents, concessions etc. of
$66.8M.

2.9       Overall this represents a cost recovery rate of some 
60 per cent. The balance of $188.6M was paid from consolidated
revenue.

In an attempt to increase departmental efficiency, the
Secretary to the Department of Aviation, in November 1983,
announced a target of an average 2 per cent per annum reduction
in real costs for the three years commencing July 1984.


	<h> The Bosch Report and Meteorological Services </h>
	

2.10      The Bosch Committee was appointed by the Minister for
Aviation early in 1984 to inquire into all matters relating to
aviation cost recovery. It reported to the Minister in November
1984. Among the Inquiry's recommendations dealing with
opportunities for reducing costs was Recommendation (R59) which
states:

	`The Department should include (in its planning) as a specific
	objective the increase of at least 9 per cent in productivity
	over a ten year period. This would be in addition to the 2 per
	cent per annum reduction in real attributable costs over three
	years to which the Department is already committed'.

2.11      On 14 August 1985, following wide consultation, the
Minister for Aviation, the Hon Peter Morris, M.P., announced
that the Government had agreed to the adoption of the Bosch
Strategy.

2.12      The Bosch Report made six recommendations concerning
meteorological services as follows:

   2    Meteorological costs should continue to be attributed to the
	industry.(R19)

   2    Formal consultative arrangements should be established between
	the Department of Aviation, operators and the Bureau of
	Meteorology to ensure that the meteorology services supplied
	to the industry are provided at the required standard, that
	costs are kept within reasonable bounds, and that the
	development of the Bureau's investment program takes into
	account the concerns of the aviation industry.(R20)

   2    The basis for charges levied against the aviation industry for
	meteorological services should continue to be the incremental
	cost associated with providing the services.(R21)

   2    The Bureau of Meteorology should complete as soon as possible
	the study into development of a comprehensive costing system
	which would enable the identification of incremental
	costs.(R22)

   2    The Bureau of Meteorology should identify each of the services
	provided and the fees charged for them in its accounts to the
	Department of Aviation.(R23)

   2    The Bureau of Meteorology should negotiate with operators
	supplying meteorological data to agree on the costs involved
	and whether they warrant development of a system for paying for
	the data.(R24)

2.13      In addition the Report also briefly addressed the
current provisions for charging for meteorological services and
stated:

	`The intention of the charging principles is to charge the
	increment cost of providing aviation meteorological services.
	Not all the principles are strictly in accord with this
	intent'.


	<h> Cost Reductions - the Basis of the Decision to Close Weather
Service Offices </h>
	

2.14      As noted above the Secretary to the Department of
Aviation had taken the initiative to anticipate the Bosch
findings through measures designed to improve the cost
effectiveness of his Department. This decision has been
subsumed by the subsequent decision of the Government to accept
the Bosch Report strategy and to proceed with its
implementation.

2.15 As part of the Department's effort to implement the
Secretary's decision, DofA decided to extend the containment
of costs to include the provision of meteorological services
to aviation.

2.16      Because of the nature of the Working Arrangements,
it proved difficult for the Bureau to determine how a general
`across the board' expenditure cut could be implemented.
Following protracted DofA and Bureau discussions, the Bureau
issued a Staff Notice on the 23 July 1985 foreshadowing the
possible closure of ten (originally nine) Weather Service
Offices (WSOs) over a three year period.

2.17      The proposed closures resulted in public protest from
a range of community interests including the general public,
farmers, fishermen, industry, port authorities and the media
as well as the aviation industry and in particular, general
aviation. Most of the communities affected were remote from the
major capital cities.

2.18      It is important to note that the existing Working
Arrangements provide under Principle 3 for the

	`Cost of shared services or facilities to be allocated 
	on a proportional basis, taking account of the relative 
	usage of the services or facilities.'

Under these arrangements therefore, it is little wonder that
the Department of Aviation is seeking a review of the charges.
There is ample evidence to support the claim that there is a
significant component of non-aviation weather services provided
by the provincial WSOs which are currently totally billed to
the Department of Aviation.

2.19      The Bureau has stated that the DofA did not formally
advise the Bureau that it did not wish to meet the full costs
of aviation meteorological services in 1984/85 until January
1985. Accordingly a shortfall of approximately $1M in the
Bureau's 1985/86 estimated revenue from charges for aviation
services exists.

2.20      The Bureau issued a Staff Notice concerning the
proposed WSO closures on 23 July 1985. Since this Staff Notice
a number of DofA and Bureau meetings have been held, some of
which have included staff associations and aviation industry
representatives. As the proposed closures had a significant
impact on the provision of non-aviation services, on 28
November 1985, the Ministers for Science and Aviation jointly
referred the issue to this Committee.


	<h> CHAPTER 3 </h>
	

	<h> EFFECTS OF THE PROPOSALS </h>
	


	<h> The Direct Effect on Weather Service Offices </h>
	

3.1       The Bureau currently operates 28 Weather Service
Offices Australia wide. The direct effect of the proposals is
the closure of ten of these Offices. Details of current status
and proposed changes are included in Tables 3.1 and 3.2.
Timetables for the implementation of the closures are presented
in Appendix VIII.

3.2       The locations are Alice Springs, Cairns, Canberra,
Hobart, Launceston, Mt Isa, Port Hedland, Rockhampton, Tamworth
and also Essendon where services are provided from the
Melbourne Airport WSO on a shift rotation basis.

3.3       Weather Service Offices form part of the three-tiered
operational organisation of the Bureau. The three tiers
comprise:

   2    the National Meteorological Centre (NMC) in Melbourne and the
	Regional Meteorological Centre (RMC) in Darwin providing
	broadscale forecast and guidance material for the whole
	Australian area of responsibility:

   2    the eight Regional Forecasting Centres (RFCs), one of which is
	located in each State or Territory Regional Office with
	responsibility for weather services in their individual areas
	of responsibility. In addition Townsville is an RFC for
	aviation purposes. The RFCs act as warning centres with
	official Tropical Cyclone Warning Centres being located in
	Perth, Brisbane and Darwin. In addition they are `parent
	offices' for the WSOs and Observing Offices in their regions;
	and

   2    Field Offices including 28 major Weather Service Offices and
	50 official Observing Offices. The WSOs are located at Civil
	(17), Defence (8) and Joint User (3) airports.

3.4      The Observing Offices form part of the Bureau's basic
surface and upper air observing network. As part of their
duties, most provide routine (hourly) and special (half-hourly)
Aerodrome Weather Reports (AWRs), or observations, specifically
for aviation and many are collocated*colocated with WSOs. The
offices are staffed by Bureau trained observers who are
represented by the Professional Radio and Electronics Institute
of Australasia (PREIA).

3.5       The Weather Service Offices are staffed by Technical
Officers (Meteorology), in general recruited from the observer
ranks, who are members of the Association of Draughting,
Supervisory and Technical Employees (ADSTE).

3.6       The Bureau of Meteorology states that the WSOs were
originally established to provide services for aviation. Their
functions, as defined by the Bureau, can be formally summarised
as follows:

   2    maintaining meteorological watch for the locality of the office
	and providing input and feedback to RFC terminal forecasts and
	amendments for the local airport;

   2    preparing trend type forecasts for the local airport (where
	applicable);

   2    deriving forecasts for particular air routes from area
	forecasts received from the National Meteorological Centre or
	a parent RFC;

   2    compiling and presenting flight documentation to aircrew;

   2    distribution and interpretation of relevant public weather
	forecasts and warnings originated by the parent RFC; and

   2    acting as a point of liaison for local organisations.

3.7      From the DofA viewpoint, the major function of the WSOs
as defined in the Working Arrangements, is the provision of
face to face and/or telephone briefing to aircrew and
Departmental operations personnel to enable clarification and
elaboration of forecasts, warnings and the current
meteorological situation. Other functions include the
distribution of flight documentation, the provision of trend
type forecasts and a terminal area thunderstorm service where
appropriate. In addition there is a stated requirement for the
provision of Aerodrome Weather Reports.

3.8       It is obvious that one of the underlying reasons for
this inquiry has been the different interpretation of the
functions of the ten WSOs concerned. On the one hand the
Department has seen the offices as primarily providing a
briefing service; the Bureau on the other hand has, in
practice, implemented a far broader definition extending to the
distribution and interpretation of public weather forecasts and
a much wider weather watch function.

3.9       In the course of this inquiry the Committee visited
all ten WSOs proposed for closure.  At three locations - Hobart, Canberra Civil and Essendon the volume of public weather services provided was obviously low and the functions were primarily for aviation. 


</sample>
