By Stuart McGill and G J Crough CHAPTER 4 THE NORTHERN AMERICAN LINKS OF THE AUSTRALIAN MINING
INDUSTRY COUNCIL MEMBERS Choice of the North American Contrast  

The basic object of the research summarised in this Chapter is
to ascertain which of those corporate groups that are members
of the Australian Mining Industry Council (AMIC) have dealings
with indigenous people in both North America and Australia. The
comparison between indigenous people in North America and
Australia has been drawn because the historical and
contemporary situation of the indigenous minorities in North
America closely resembles that of Aboriginal Australians.

It should be noted however that there are many other locations
where transnational mining companies have extensive experience
in dealing with indigenous people, either as indigenous
minorities or as Third World governments. Some of these
locations, and the agreements, are mentioned in the corporate
profiles that follow, but they are not the main focus of this
Report.

In the past, mining companies in Australia have argued that the
Australian case is unique and that overseas precedents are not
relevant. The advantage of addressing only the North American
case is that it is far more difficult to distinguish
differences from the Australian situation. It is therefore more
difficult for mining companies to justify why their attitudes
and behaviour should be different on the other side of the
Pacific Ocean.

Such research raises several other issues. Obviously the most
important result flowing from such research is the
identification of those corporate groups which have experience
in dealing with indigenous minorities. However, it also raises
issues in relation to the motivations behind the behaviour of
various corporate groups and organisations in Australia in
recent years. These and other matters will be addressed in this
Chapter.

 Major Corporate Groups in AMIC  

In order to facilitate this study it is necessary to condense
the list of 135 organisations that are members of AMIC into a
list of major corporate groups. Two member organisations can
immediately be excluded: one is a professional organisation
(Association of Consulting Surveyors Inc) and one is a
partnership (W.T. Partnership).

A corporate group consists of a parent company, subsidiaries
and associated companies. For the purpose of this study,
subsidiaries are companies in which the parent company has a
controlling interest, while an associated company is one in
which the parent has an interest sufficient to exert a
significant degree of influence. The corporate group is
generally characterised by centralised and coordinated
management control over the operations of the various companies
within the group, particularly in relation to the financial and
investment decisions of the companies. As a result, the parent
company requires complete knowledge of the activities being
undertaken by its group members.

The companies within the group may operate in only one country,
or as is usually the case with large companies, in a number of
countries. Corporate groups with operations in a number of
countries are referred to as transnational or multinational
corporations.

By applying these criteria, the list of AMIC members can be
condensed into approximately 50 corporate groups. These groups
include as few as one or two AMIC companies, or as many as the
19 CRA Ltd companies that are members of AMIC. It should be
noted that such corporate groups also include many companies
that are not members of AMIC. For instance, such non-member
companies may be involved in non-mining activities, or in other
countries, or a corporate group may have simply decided that
it is unnecessary for some of the mining companies in the group
to be members of AMIC.

With regard to a corporate group's membership of AMIC, it is
relevant to note that only one member of a corporate group pays
membership dues. For example, although several companies of the
BHP group are members of AMIC, only The Broken Hill Proprietary
Company Ltd pays membership fees. Nevertheless the other
members of the BHP group listed as members of AMIC are treated
as full members of the Council. AMIC advises that this does not
create administrative problems, such as the issue of which
corporations are entitled to vote, because all decisions are
taken by consensus. In the meantime, it is clear that such
arrangements confer the advantage that the membership of AMIC
appears to be larger than the actual number of corporate groups
represented.

In other words, AMIC appears to represent approximately 133
companies, rather than the 50 corporate groups to which it can
be reduced. This reduction in size of AMIC's membership is
supported by the very manner in which AMIC collects its
membership dues. Nevertheless, for the purposes of this Report,
the number of corporate groups has been reduced further by the
inclusion of associated companies in the corporate groups. For
example, a study of the shareholders and directors of the
Newmont Mining Corporation in the United States shows that the
company is closely associated with the Anglo American
Corporation group of South Africa. The Australian subsidiary
Newmont Holdings Pty Ltd is here included as part of the Anglo
American group, whereas AMIC probably considers the company to
be an independent member.

  

If the companies that are not significant, for the purpose of
this Report, are eliminated from the 50 corporate groups which
are members of AMIC, then the number of significant corporate
groups that comprise AMIC can be reduced to 23. These are
listed in Table 9. Corporate groups are considered to be not
significant for current purposes if no member or members of the
group are carrying out substantial mining or exploration
activities in Australia, or if so, those activities have no
known impact on Aboriginal land or interests. The groups in
this category are listed in Table 10. It should be noted that
the full list of AMIC members and their parent companies or
substantial shareholders is shown in Appendix 3 (as at August
1985).

There are some comments which arise from a consideration of the
companies listed in Table 10. All but two of the 26 groups
listed have only one subsidiary or associate as a member of
AMIC. Kalgoorlie Mining Associates has one other company in the
group which is also a member of AMIC, and Gencor (Australia)
Pty Ltd has two subsidiaries which are members. In addition,
it should also be noted that Queensland Alumina Ltd and Worsley
Alumina Pty Ltd are alumina refining companies which are owned
by consortia of major companies (some of which are members of
AMIC in their own right). As such they are hardly corporate
groups, and are listed here mainly for convenience.
Accordingly, whereas these 25 groups represent 28 members of
AMIC, the 23 corporate groups which are considered significant
for this study represent the remainder of the 133 companies
which are members of AMIC.

The validity of an approach which focusses on the major
corporate groups is supported by the various industry
concentration statistics published in recent years. For
example, of the 338 taxable companies in the mining industry
in 1982-83 the largest 36 accounted for over 96% of the taxable
income (Commissioner of Taxation 1985). Statistics published
by the Australian Bureau of Statistics show that the largest
4 enterprise groups accounted for 43% of total mining industry
value added in 1982-83. The largest 12 groups accounted for 65%
of industry value added, and the largest 20 for 77% (out of a
total of 914 enterprise groups). Quite clearly it is these
large companies which dominate the industry in terms of
production, investment, exports and revenue.

  

A further feature of the membership of AMIC is the large number
of foreign controlled companies. As Appendix 3 shows, 55 of the
member companies can be classified as Australian controlled,
72 are foreign controlled, and 6 (the MIM group) are associated
companies of a US corporation. These figures are consistent
with the statistics published by the Australian Bureau of
Statistics on foreign ownership and control of the mining
industry.

The level of foreign ownership, measured in terms of value
added was 50.4% in 1982-83, while the level of foreign control
was 56.6%. Companies from the United States and United Kingdom
have been the most important foreign investors in the industry,
with US ownership of 24% and UK of 16% in 1982-83.

On the basis of controlling shareholdings, only 7 of the
significant corporate groups are Australian controlled: BHP,
CSR, North Broken Hill, Peko-Wallsend, Pancontinental Mining,
Pioneer Concrete Services, and Western Mining Corporation. As
noted previously, the MIM group is an associated company of the
US corporation Asarco Inc. It is interesting to note that the
AMIC Aboriginal Affairs Committee includes representatives of
all of these Australian controlled corporate groups with the
exception of Pancontinental Mining Ltd, as well as MIM, CRA
(two members), Shell Company, and the Chamber of Mines of
Western Australia. A full list of the members of the Committee
is included in Appendix 4.

 Corporate Groups With North American Experience in Dealing with
Indigenous People  

The thrust of this section of the Report is not directed at the
issue of foreign ownership and control. It arises only because
the foreign ownership issue overlaps with the question of the
extent of international dealings with indigenous people. This
is largely due to the fact that Australia has few of its own
transnational corporations. Although definitions of a
transnational corporation vary, BHP is probably the only major
Australian-owned company that is a member of AMIC that can be
classified as a transnational corporation with respect to the
mining industry. Such overseas interests that Australian
companies do have are summarised in Appendix 5.

The impact of this fact is that of the significant corporate
groups identified in AMIC, it is principally the foreign-
controlled transnational groups that have had experience on
indigenous land in North America. Table 11 lists the companies
that have, or have had, dealings with Aboriginals in Australia
and Indians in North America. It should be noted that a number
of these companies are members of the Non-Producers' Group of
AMIC, but have extensive exploration programmes throughout
Australia.

  

Although the corporate profiles later in this section contain
greater details, there are a few comments about the above list
which it is appropriate to make at this stage. First, the
numbers in brackets in the left hand column are the number of
companies that are members of AMIC who are also in the same
corporate group. These companies form a total of 46 of the 133
companies that make up the membership of AMIC. More
importantly, these 12 groups are more than half of the
significant mining groups that are represented by AMIC, and
three of these groups are members of the AMIC committee on
Aboriginal land rights (BHP, MIM, Shell).

Second, except for BHP and MIM, all the groups of companies in
the list have obtained their experience of indigenous resource
rights by virtue of the fact that they are subsidiaries of
parent organizations which have operations in North America.
Within this category, Aberfoyle is a slightly different case
because it was an Australian company which was acquired by the
Canadian mining conglomerate Cominco Ltd. MIM is a separate
case because it is now an associated company of Asarco Inc as
each of the two companies have substantial holdings in each
other. To return to the point about Australian transnationals,
it is only BHP which has had dealings with indigenous people
in other countries by virtue of its acquisition of an overseas
subsidiary.

 Corporate Groups With No Apparent Experience in Dealing with
Indigenous People in North America  

By way of contrast, the other significant corporate groups in
AMIC consist of predominantly Australian-owned companies. The
feature which distinguishes these companies is their apparent
lack of experience of dealing with indigenous people in North
America. These companies are listed in Table 12.

  

The salient features of Table 12 may be reviewed as follows.
First, these eleven corporate groups are made up of a total of
59 member companies of AMIC. However, if CRA is excluded from
this list, then only 40 member companies are represented. 
                                                          
