CHAPTER 2 PROPOSED OPERATIONAL STRATEGY 2.1      Objectives, functions and uses of the Australia Card Program  

2.1.1     Within the context of the Government's desire to
provide fairer and more equitable taxation and welfare systems,
it is the Commission's understanding that the principal
objective of the Australia Card Program is to establish a
mechanism for the unique identification of persons within
Australia, and by this process to:

(a) reduce the incidence of -

    2 tax evasion

    2 incorrect payment of health and welfare benefits and
      other government moneys

    2 other abuses of government programs; and

(b) generally assist government agencies to carry out their
    functions more effectively.

2.1.2     The functions of the Australia Card Program are to
provide a framework of identification within Australia which
will aid in the positive identification of:

(a) participants in specified financial transactions (for
    taxation purposes);

(b) persons lawfully entitled to undertake work in Australia;

(c) persons entitled to Commonwealth Government pensions,
    income support payments and assistance under other government
    programs;

(d) persons entitled to Medicare benefits;

(e) persons entitled to an Australian passport; and

(f) persons seeking to register for employment with the
    Commonwealth Employment Service.

2.1.3     Whilst the Program clearly will not be a panacea for
all the ills of tax evasion (particularly in relation to the
cash economy and organised crime), it can successfully achieve
the stated objectives and perform the functions listed above.

2.1.4     Appendix D outlines the uses of the Australia Card
and register which are intended by the Government and are
detailed in the Government's submission to the Joint Select
Committee.

2.1.5     The operational objectives outlined in Section 2.3
below have been developed after careful consideration of these
objectives, functions and uses and the system requirements that
they imply.

 2.2       Companion system for entities  

2.2.1     The most significant revenue gains expected from the
Australia Card Program are those arising from the taxation
uses. To prevent the transfer or leakage of these revenue gains
to entities, the Government has accepted the need for a
companion system for such entities. In this context, "entity"
means any organisation or association (whether incorporated or
unincorporated) and includes persons engaging in transactions
in joint names.

2.2.2     The companion system for entities proposed by the
Australian Taxation Office is outlined in Appendix E. It does
not involve the allocation of a separate unique number to each
entity but relies instead on a requirement that, where an
entity engages in a prescribed transaction, the Australia Card
of an appropriate responsible individual associated with the
entity is required to validate the transaction.

2.2.3     The companion entity system will be administered by
the Australian Taxation Office (ATO). Whilst it should have
little effect on the administration of the Australia Card
Program by the Commission, it is recognised that:

(a) the establishment and maintenance of the highest
    practicable level of integrity for the Australia Card Program
    will be critical not only to the success of that Program but
    also to the effective operation of the companion entity system;
    and

(b) continuing liaison with the ATO will be necessary to
    identify promptly areas of mutual concern or issues on which
    the policies or practices of one organisation may have
    implications for the other organisation.

 2.3       Operational objectives  

2.3.1     The broad operational requirements for the
administration of the Australia Card Program by the Commission
are that the system should be able to:

(a) register, with a very high level of integrity, every
    eligible person and allocate an Australia Card number to every
    registered person;

(b) issue Australia Cards in respect of all registered persons;

(c) receive data from government agencies to establish records
    and verify identity and eligibility;

(d) provide information to government agencies necessary for
    approved uses of the Program.

2.3.2     The Commission regards integrity as the cornerstone of the
Australia Card Program. It is a central issue that is critical
to the success of the Program in terms of both the achievement
of its objectives and its acceptance by the general community. It
is for this reason that integrity has been made the first
operational objective below; it is addressed in more
comprehensive terms in Section 2.6 below.

2.3.3     The principal operational objectives for the
establishment and administration of the Program are taken to
be:

(a) to achieve the highest practicable level of integrity for
     the data on the Australia Card register;

(b) to ensure that the optimum safeguards and controls are in
    place to protect the integrity of the system and the privacy
    of individuals and personal information relating to them;

(c) to register and issue Australia Cards to at least 96% of
    eligible persons over the two year implementation period and
    subsequently to the entire eligible population;

(d) in the ongoing phase, to reissue cards as required and to
    register the newborn and new arrivals from other countries in
    a timely manner;

(e) to pay particular attention to the needs of (and, where
    necessary, to make specific arrangements for) special groups
    such as people in remote locations, people from Aboriginal
    and ethnic communities, institutionalised persons and
    Australians overseas;

(f) to develop, implement and administer the Program so as to
    minimise public inconvenience;

(g) to provide ready access for cardholders to their own data
    on the Australia Card register;

(h) to provide (in a manner consistent with (b) above) on-line
    and other appropriate enquiry facilities to enable
    authorised government agencies to access the Australia Card
    register and to provide update information to those user
    agencies in a timely manner to assist in the effective
    operation of their programs; and

(i) to operate with the lowest possible administrative costs
    consistent with these objectives.

2.3.4     The operational strategy outlined in this chapter is
designed to achieve these objectives and has been used in the
preparation of the estimated work volumes, resource
requirements, costs and timescales provided in this report.

2.3.5     It should be appreciated, however, that some aspects
of this operational strategy may be revised following the
further planning and evaluation referred to in Section 5.4.

 2.4       Overview of operational strategy  

2.4.1     For the general community, the principal impact of
the Australia Card Program during the two year implementation
phase will be the arrangements for registration of eligible
persons and the issue of Australia Cards. Invitations to apply
for registration, based on matching of the Medicare database
against other government databases, will be posted
progressively over the first 20 months of the implementation
period. The invitations will request completion and return of
an application for registration.

2.4.2     After further checking of the information supplied
by the applicant, he will be asked to phone a toll-free central
enquiry number for the relevant State and make an appointment
for a registration interview at a convenient branch office. At
that interview, the applicant will provide proof of identity
and eligibility and a signature for inclusion on his Australia
Card.

2.4.3     Special publicity arrangements during the last four
months of the two year implementation phase will encourage
those who have not received invitations to apply for
registration.

2.4.4     The registration arrangements outlined in the three
preceding paragraphs are described in more detail in Section
2.11 and its supporting Appendix M.

2.4.5     Australia Cards will be produced at a secure central
site using automated techniques and will be distributed under
security conditions. They will be made available for collection
at Commission branch offices 2 - 3 weeks after the registration
interview.

2.4.6     It is recognised that special arrangements will be
essential for various groups in the community who will not be
able to visit a branch office or who will require special
attention in other ways -- these arrangements are discussed in
Section 2.14 below.

2.4.7     Other essential elements of the Commission's proposed
operational strategy are that:

(a) the Commission will continue to operate as one organisation
    with its several functions -- Medicare, Medibank Private and
    Australia Card -- all carried out within the existing
    integrated structure;

(b) a three stage computer matching process (using the Medicare
    enrolment file as the base) will be used during the
    registration process to establish and validate identity and
    eligibility;

(c) the Australia Card register will contain data on each
    registered person including basic personal information 
    (name, address, sex, date of birth etc.), personal information
    required to establish identity and eligibility (e.g. birth
    certificate or immigration details), card issue details, audit
    trail information, and, depending on the views of the Joint
    Select Committee and the wishes of the community, optional
    emergency information,

(d) the Australia Card will contain name, number, sex, date of
    birth, period of validity, citizen/resident/visitor status,
    signature (on adult cards), name and number of responsible
    adult (on children's cards), eligibility for Medicare and
    authority to work (visitors' cards), and appropriate security
    features;

(e) the promotional plan to explain the program and to
    encourage registration will include brochure distribution
    through government agencies, a national letterbox drop and
    reinforcement advertising through press, radio and TV;

(f) cardholders will have access to their record on the
    register (subject to some limitations mentioned later);

(g) authorised government agencies will have access (by on-line
    computer terminal or other appropriate means) to the
    register for approved purposes;

(h) the data on the register will be maintained using
    information supplied by cardholders (and relevant government
    agencies) and updated information will be available immediately
    to authorised users;

(i) Australia Cards will replace Medicare cards entirely during
    the 2 year implementation phase; and

(j) the Commission will install and operate a computer system
    for State registries of births, deaths and marriages.

 2.5       Privacy, rights of access and appeal mechanisms  

2.5.1     As indicated in Appendix B the Australia Card
proposal has received strong public support as a general system
of identification and as a means of reducing tax evasion and
welfare fraud. However, it has been criticised by civil
liberties groups and others who fear that the Program may lead
to an erosion of personal privacy and individual liberty
through the possible creation of dossiers on individuals or
uses of the system beyond those intended.

2.5.2     It is clear that if human rights and personal privacy
are to be protected, adequate legislative safeguards and
administrative controls will be essential. At the same time,
comprehensive information program explaining Australia Card
and these safeguards and controls should alleviate the concerns
that have been expressed.

2.5.3    Chapter 14 of the Government's submission to the Joint
Select Committee discusses privacy and human rights issues and
describes the legislative controls and safeguards proposed by
the Government. In particular, it outlines the role of the
proposed Data Protection Agency which would, inter alia,
provide an external appeals mechanism for the review of
decisions made by the Commission or other government agencies
in relation to data held on or obtained from the Australia Card
register. Chapter 16 of the Government's submission details the
proposed internal review mechanisms and rights of appeal
concerning disputes and complaints arising from Australia Card
data and procedures.

2.5.4     Appendix F of this report summarises these issues and
describes how the legislative requirements would be reflected
in the Commission's administration of the Program. That
appendix also explains the arrangements for access to the
register:

(a) by each cardholder enabling him to check the accuracy of
    the personal information held on the register which relates to
    him; and

(b) by approved user agencies to personal information on the
    register enabling them to carry out the functions for which
    approval has been granted.

 2.6       Integrity of the Program  

2.6.1     A major determinant of the integrity and success of
the Program will be the effectiveness of the validation of
identity and eligibility prior to the allocation of an
Australia Card number and issue of the Card. However, the only
way in which integrity -- in this context -- could be
guaranteed would be to make the checks on identity and
eligibility absolutely exhaustive.

2.6.2     To apply exhaustive checks for each person would not
be acceptable to the general community and would be seen as an
unnecessary intrusion into personal privacy.  It must be understood, however, that any system with checks that are less than exhaustive -- including the system proposed in this report, despite the range of safeguards that is being contemplated -- will inevitably have some potential for exploitation by those who are really determined.

