<sample>
	<id> H18 </id>
	


	<note> 2011 words </note>
	


	<source> The Law Reform Commission Report No 3 - The Recognition of Aboriginal Customery  Laws </source>
	


	<h>17.  Aboriginal customary laws and the criminal justice system </h>
	

  It is, no doubt, a question of high legislative policy whether
  tribal aboriginals, who are unable to understand the concepts
  of the ordinary law, ought to be tried under that law.
  
	<misc> Ngatayi v R (1980) 30 ALR 27, 34 (Gibbs, Mason, Wilson JJ) </misc>
	

  The existence of two systems of law side by side, the
  prevailing one and aboriginal customary law, with their very
  different attitudes to guilt and responsibility, creates
  serious problems and the question of how far our laws should
  apply to aboriginals and how far their law should be allowed
  to apply to them is controversial.
  
	<misc> id, 36-7 (Murphy J) </misc>
	

393. The Commission's Terms of Reference. The Terms of
Reference refer to the `difficulties that have at times
emerged in the application of the existing criminal justice
system to members of the Aboriginal race', and require the
Commission to investigate, among other things:

  a) whether, and in what manner, existing courts dealing with
  criminal charges against Aborigines should be empowered to
  apply Aboriginal customary law and practices in the trial and
  punishment of Aborigines; and
  (b) to what extent Aboriginal communities should have the power
  to apply their customary law and practices in the punishment
  and rehabilitation of Aborigines.

Although the Reference is not restricted to the recognition of
Aboriginal customary laws in the criminal law, a particular
concern of the Reference is the difficulties often experienced
by Aborigines dealt with by the Australian criminal justice
system (and, equally, by the criminal justice system in dealing
with those Aborigines). These questions are considered in this
part of the Report. In this chapter it is proposed to set out
the basic factual and comparative background, and to outline
the various issues which arise in considering the recognition
of Aboriginal customary laws in the trial and sentencing of
Aborigines. Chapter 18 will consider the problems arising with
the substantive criminal law in its application to Aboriginal
defendants, including the question whether a new defence should
be recognised based on Aboriginal customary laws. Chapter 19
discusses the converse question, whether Aboriginal customary
laws should themselves be imported into the general legal
system in some way, so as to be a basis for criminal liability
and punishment under the general law. Chapter 20 discusses
procedural as distinct from substantive forms of recognition
of Aboriginal customary laws in this area. Finally, Chapter 21
discusses in more detail questions of the sentencing of
Aborigines convicted of offences, and in particular the
application of `customary law and practices' in their
punishment and rehabilitation.


	<h> The Statistical Background </h>
	

394. The Disproportionate Impact of the Criminal Justice
System. That Aborigines are subject to the general criminal law
has long been established. Great difficulties have sometimes
been experienced in the trial of traditional Aborigines, whose
comprehension not only of the forms and procedures of their
trial but also of the substance of the charge is often slight
or even non-existent. But, despite difficulties in particular
cases, the criminal law has been applied to Aborigines in all
its aspects. The results of its application are now so well
known as to be notorious. Aborigines are grossly over-
represented in Australian criminal statistics, both in terms
of conviction rates and rates of imprisonment. In her
`pioneering study', Dr Eggleston pointed out that in Western
Australia in 1965, Aborigines, who constituted 2.5% of the
State's population, were convicted of 11% of offences and made
up 24% of the prison population. In South Australia in the same
year, Aborigines (0.7% of the population) accounted for 14%
of the admissions to prison. This over-representation, she
found, was not only the result of different patterns of
criminality, but of differences in arrest, prosecution and
sentencing practices. Although the distribution of offences has
changed since the 1960s, the overall situation remains similar.
National Prison Census figures for 1984 indicate that
Aborigines, while less than 2% of the Australian population,
comprise approximately 10.5% of the prison population. The rate
of imprisonment of Aborigines is over 16 times that of non-
Aborigines. On a State by State basis the rates are as follows:


	<note> table omitted </note>
	

Indeed, it is possible that these figures understate the real
situation, at least with respect to some classes of offence.
In a study of violent crime on Queensland Aboriginal reserves,
Dr Paul Wilson found an annual homicide rate (for the 17
communities studied) of 39.6 per 100 000, compared with a rate
for Queensland of 3.28 and for all Australia of 4.0. The rate
of serious assault on these reserves was also far greater than
the Queensland rate.

  Assault is far more likely than murder to be ignored by white
  police, to go unreported, or to be dealt with informally by
  Aboriginal police on reserves. But even with assault we find
  the same bleak picture emerging from the statistics. The rate
  for serious assault charges on reserves is 226.05 per 100 000
  compared with a Queensland figure of 43.85. So, although the
  reported Aboriginal rate is five times greater than for that
  State as a whole, the enormous `hidden' assault rate - crimes
  not reported - is probably 10 to 15 times the State or
  national figure.

395. The Position with Minor Offences. The exorbitant crime and
imprisonment rates recorded in these studies are not confined
to serious or violent crimes. At least in recent times, a high
proportion of Aboriginal offences has been of a minor,
repetitive, sometimes even trivial character. The New South
Wales Anti-Discrimination Board in a study of street offences
by Aborigines found that:

  in 10 NSW towns with high Aboriginal populations, Aborigines
  charged with minor offences in public places greatly outnumber
  non-Aborigines. The behaviour resulting in the charges was in
  the main of a trivial nature, the majority of offences
  involving the use of unseemly words. Penalties, too, have a
  more severe impact on Aboriginal people. An appreciable number
  of those convicted and fined in the 10 towns in this study went
  to jail rather than pay the fine, even though jail is not a
  punishment option available under the Offences in Public Places
  Act.

In South Australia between 1 January 1983 - 30 June 1983, 34%
of all persons convicted of `drunkenness', `minor street
offences' and `offences against order' were Aboriginal. In
country areas a similar pattern emerges to that in NSW:

  A study of court records ... show that courts servicing
  communities with a substantial Aboriginal population ... have
  markedly higher rates of imprisonment for vagrancy offences
  and fines and imprisonment for public drunkenness offenders
  than other courts. An Aboriginal defendant charged with
  offensive behaviour before the country courts in this State
  is five times more likely to receive a prison sentence and six
  times more likely to be refused bail than non-Aboriginals.

The National Prison Census of 1984 indicates that 14.3% of all
persons in prison for `offensive behaviour' offences are
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander. Aborigines and Torres
Strait Islanders are similarly
disproportionately*disproprotionately represented for other
`good order' offences (26.5% of all prisoners) and for justice
procedure offences eg breach of bond (17.3%). Changes in the
law aimed at remedying this situation - such as the
decriminalisation of intoxication or reform of the law relating
to street offences - have often not produced the desired
result. Such changes do not necessarily lead to a reduction
in the level of contact by Aborigines with the criminal justice
system, and especially with the police.

396. Aboriginal Juvenile Offenders. The statistics for juvenile
offenders present a similar picture. For example, in the
Northern Territory in 1983-4, 400 of the 894 appearances
(44.7%) by juvenile defendants in criminal cases were made by
Aborigines; in Western Australia in the same year the figure
was 1173 of 8266, (14.2%).&quot; As the Director of the Office of
Crime Statistics in South Australia has pointed out, such
figures:

  consistently ... show that young Aboriginal people suspected
  of offending are:
  2 more likely to be arrested than summonsed;
  2 more likely to be referred to courts rather than to aid
  panels (during the first half of 1982, 64% of young Aboriginal
  defendants went to court, compared to only 36% of other
  defendants - penalties imposed by aid panels generally are
  far less severe than courts);
  2 more likely to have been remanded in custody.

397. What do the Statistics Mean? Commenting on earlier but
similar Aboriginal imprisonment rates the then Director of the
Australian Institute of Criminology said:

  These are dramatic rates of imprisonment by any standards and
  for any community. Just to quote them is to question their
  justification. You have to believe either that Aboriginals are
  the most criminal of minorities in the world or that there is
  something inherently wrong with a system which uses
  imprisonment so liberally.

The problems reflected by these statistics cannot be attributed
to any one cause, whether this is actual offending rates, the
problematic definition of offences in some cases, or
discriminatory policing. The situation - or rather, the range
of situations - which underly the statistics is undoubtedly
the product of a variety of factors. But understanding of these
remains limited, and the need for careful assessment of the
present position, as well as for appropriate action, is
obvious. Where the situation described in these studies and
reports results from discriminatory policing, steps should be
taken to prevent such discrimination in future. To the extent
that it results from insensitive application of the law, the
law or its administration should be appropriately reformed. To
the extent that it results from poverty, social and educational
deprivation and poor standards of health (engendering
attitudes of apathy, boredom or despair) these should be
confronted and if possible remedied. To the extent that it
results from alcohol or petrol sniffing, the provision of
appropriate rehabilitation and support services should be
encouraged. All this is well enough known and ought to be
generally accepted. In many areas some steps have been or are
being taken, by or in collaboration with Aboriginal agencies
and organisations, in the directions suggested above. But the
question remains: what is the relevance of these statistics for
this Reference? To what extent are they the product of non-
recognition of Aboriginal customary laws? Do they reflect
problems experienced by all Aborigines, or only certain groups?
Are the problems a product of conflict between the general law
and Aboriginal customary laws, and if so, to what extent can
they be resolved through their recognition?
 
398. Large Heterogeneous Communities. Many Aborigines, including
many traditionally oriented Aborigines, now live in much larger
groups than was usual in pre-contact times. Many of these
groups comprise people from different language groups and
localities, with consequent dislocation and disharmony. The
survey of Queensland reserves conducted by Wilson:

  found two distinct clusters of reserves. One cluster had a very
  high rate of violence and the other was relatively low,
  although the latter rate was high by white standards. Examples
  of communities where violence rates were high included Palm
  Island, Weipa South and Yarrabah, where the average rate of
  violence was 7.07 per 1000 people. Those in the low-violence
  group (with a violence rating of 2.31 per 1000) include
  Lockhart, Doomadgee and Aurukun. High violence reserves were
  marked by a number of characteristics: alcohol was legally
  available; they had only low to medium levels of traditional
  culture; they had relatively high populations; most
  importantly, they were reserves that had received displaced
  Aborigines from other areas. Palm Island was originally
  established as a penal settlement. Weipa South had taken in
  people forcibly removed by police from their tribal lands at
  Mapoon, as well as others from Aurukun and Edward River.
  Yarrabah has people from a number of tribes. Reserves with a
  lower rating had nearly the reverse pattern: they were
  communities in which alcohol was not legally available; where
  relatively high levels of traditional culture survived; they
  had low populations; they were generally isolated from white
  influence; they were not receivers of people forced from their
  traditional areas. These trends in violence and destruction on
  Aboriginal reserves point to explanations which are familiar
  to observers of other societies. 


</sample>
