HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION BILL 1985 HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL 1985 HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION (TRANSITIONAL 
PROVISIONS AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS) BILL 1985 AUSTRALIAN BILL OF RIGHTS BILL 1985 Second Readings  

    Debate resumed.

    Senator GARETH EVANS (Victoria - Minister for Resources
and Energy) (6.48) - Before this debate was interrupted I had
identified the two basic themes which seemed to have run
through the opposition to the Australian Bill of Rights Bill
at least so far as the contributions in this chamber are
concerned. The first theme was that the Bill is unnecessary
and, secondly, that it is undesirable, indeed undesirable in
some people's minds to the point of being dangerous.

    As to the first point, the alleged lack of necessity in
this legislation, I had begun by dealing with the argument that
the common law was the great protector of individual rights and
was, indeed, a sufficient protector of rights beyond which we
needed no support of the kind embodied in this Bill. I called
in aid an admirable contribution to the debate from Senator
Puplick in which he demonstrated comprehensively and precisely
just how that argument could not be sustained. The reality of
the matter is that there are a number of rights and freedoms
matters where there is a vacuum in the law and which the common
law has at the moment absolutely nothing to say. The reality
also is that there are a number of other areas where reality
also is that there are a number of other areas where the
legislatures have filled the vacuums, but in an unacceptable
way, again leaving in a different fashion the courts with
nothing to say - nothing to say because there is no hook on
which they, the judges, or the litigants before them, can hand
an argument advanced for the protection of fundamental rights
and freedoms.

    The reality is that rights and freedoms cannot be left to
be secured by default; they do require active care and
attention by legislatures around the country. They require
active care and attention both in the form of individual
measures in specific areas such as race and sex discrimination
legislation; property protection legislation; criminal
investigation; law protection legislation and all the other
piecemeal areas with which we have become familiar. They also
need protection by the kinds of overarching, overriding,
standard setting, guarantee-producing legislation of the kind
involved in this Bill of Rights. It is necessary that our
human rights performance in this country be better than it has
been in the past, whatever the standards of comparison that
might properly be made between us and many other countries in
the world with worse human rights records. We have done well
in the past but we can do a lot better. The judges and courts
could do with the extra reinforcement and weaponry in the
interests of rights and liberties which this Bill will give
them.

    Let me turn to the group of arguments which says that this
Bill of Rights is positively undesirable and dangerous. So
many statements which have been made here and outside the
Parliament have been so wildly and grotesquely astray that they
have been difficult to take seriously. Let me at least try to
deal quickly with some of the more extravagant claims that have
been made. A lot of more detailed points, I guess, can be made
during the Committee stage of this debate, which I do not think
will be short.

    Firstly, we have had the constantly reiterated and
dogmatically asserted argument that this is a Bill which takes
away rights, that fewer rights will be enjoyed in the community
than before the Bill of Rights was ever dreamed of. The basic
argument which seems to prevail when people run this line is
that a number of rights around the place which are recognised
as important or in some cases fundamental are not
specifically addressed in this Bill. The right to own property
and not to have it acquired unjustly or compulsorily is often
repeated as being in this category. As I said earlier in this
speech, and no doubt will be saying again a dozen times before
this debate is out, this Bill of Rights contains a very central
and important Article which protects absolutely, unequivocally
and clearly those rights which may exist but which are not set
out in the list in this Bill. I am referring to Article 2 of
the Bill of Rights, which makes it absolutely clear that any
right which is not set out in the Bill of Rights, but which may
otherwise exist, is not to be regarded as diminished in any way
by not appearing in this otherwise fairly comprehensive list.

    A second claim that is made about the alleged dangers of
the Bill goes to the suggestion that it gives protection to
certain alleged rights around the place, or claims of right,
which, if protected, would undermine the fabric of society.
Thus, it is suggested that the Bill would operate to legalise
abortion, to encourage and legalise homosexual adoption, to
authorise the confiscation of private property, and half a
dozen extravagant claims of this kind. I can assert absolutely,
without fear of rational contradiction, that claims of this
kind are absolutely false and without foundation.

    I give just one example of a claim which has been made and
which featured as recently as Senator Lewis's contribution to
this debate late this afternoon; that is, the extravagant claim
that this Bill, at least in its original form, would have
operated so as to legalise homosexual marriage. How on earth
could anyone read into any of the provisions of this Bill that
it could legalise homosexual marriage? A lot of people have
chosen to read that in because of the language of the first
draft of this Bill of Rights, which simply said:

    All persons have the right to marry. Every man and woman of
marriageable age shall have the right to marry.

So we had the lunatic argument that `all persons' meant,
construed literally, that men could marry men and women could
marry women. All I say in relation to that is that I do not
think it is seriously advanced by any of the people around this
place that the Pope is in favour of homosexual marriage. Yet
we have a document, the Charter of the Rights of the Family,
presented a little while ago by the Holy See, in which we find
in Article 1, as the pre-eminent right of the family, the
proposition, not qualified in any way by reference to `opposite
sex' or language of this kind, which states:

    All persons have the right . . . to marry . . . every man
and every woman, having reached marriage age . . . has the
right to marry . . .

That is the kind of distortion we get. Nobody would remotely
think that language of that kind could be construed as an
invitation to, encouragement of or justification for
homosexual marriage, yet such is the perverse, twisted and
distorted - sometimes deliberately so - mentality that people
have taken to the Bill of Rights that they have asserted that
language like this, which appears in a document from the Holy
See, is capable of that construction when it appears in the
Australian Bill of Rights Bill. It is a nonsensical chain of
argument, one which we have heard ad nauseum and about which
we have been driven to distraction.

     Then we have the alleged dangers involved in leaving the
interpretation of rights to unelected judges, as distinct from
distinguished parliamentarians and self-restrained legislators
of the kind who have acted in civil liberties matters in the
past. There are several answers to that claim. This is a theme
which again can be picked up in more detail at the Committee
stage. The first is that it underestimates dramatically the
extent to which judges are already involved in determining
sensitive issues in their administration of the common law; in
particular, in a system such as ours with a written
Constitution, in adjudicating on disputes that arise under
that Constitution. Judges have a sensitive and delicate task
already involving the exercise of judgment, which they exercise
very well, and it is nonsense to suggest that they will be
exercising some fundamentally new role in any potentially
dangerous way as a result of this legislation being passed. I
quote from one of the most distinguished law lords in British
judicial history, Lord Scarman, who, in a lecture in 1980,
said:

    We can, therefore, dismiss as completely unsound such
objections as those which, frequently heard in the United
Kingdom, are variations on the theme that judges must not be
brought into the political arena. They are there already - as
umpires, not gladiators or competitors. They have always been
there: and there they will remain. There is nothing
inappropriate in requiring judges to decide justiciable issues
arising in a political struggle: and no reason for judges not
to be trusted to act judicially and according to law, though
the case raises political as well as legal questions.

There is a comprehensive and very effective rebuttal of that
particular line of argument. One can expect Australian judges
to find the interpretation of the Bill of Rights an unfamiliar
task, but we can reasonably expect them to cope very well with
that task, just as their brethren in Canada have. I had the
pleasure of talking about just this issue with the Canadian
Chief Justice, Sir Brian Dickson, very recently. He made just
that point; that a Bill of Rights, although initially
unfamiliar, had become part of the judicial landscape and the
courts are responding to it constructively and effectively.

    Finally, the answer to the concern about the role of an
unelected judiciary is that under this kind of legislation, and
designedly so, Parliament has the last word. If the judgment
of the courts goes astray, in the opinion of this Parliament,
we will retain the capacity to legislate an appropriate
amendment accordingly. Among this litany of complaints about
the dangers associated with the Bill of Rights, a number of
suggestions are made about the dangerous powers being vested
in the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission. It is
extraordinary that so much should be made of this and so little
regard should be had to the character of this institution that
is being created, or very largely recreated out of the existing
Human Rights Commission, because it is an institution which
exercises investigative, conciliatory and reporting functions
in exactly the same way as scores of other similar institutions
now enshrined in statute law at both Commonwealth and State
levels with powers that are not in any significant way
different from the powers exercised by dozens of other similar
institutions.

    The Government is prepared and willing to listen carefully
to arguments that may be made in the Committee stage on this
question. It may be that different views can reasonably be held
on the scale of penalties or the need for self-incrimination
provisions of the kind that appear in some 90 other statutes.
The argument may be made, which we will listen to, about the
need for compulsory conferences and so on, but I simply do not
accept the validity of the root and branch attack that has been
made. I particularly do not accept it when I have regard, as
I hope other honourable senators will, to the very clear
precedent which exists in the Human Rights Commission, which
now exists as a result of legislation enacted by the Fraser
Government. The element of hypocrisy and humbug in the attack
on the proposed Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
model, when one compares what is involved in the proposal here
with what exists at the moment, is really quite breathtaking.

    Let me finish by saying this: None of the criticism that
has been made of the Bill has in any way destroyed its
credibility as the most farreaching and far-sighted attempt
in our history to secure the protection of fundamental rights
and liberties. 

