Victorian Paddlers Raise $110-120,000 by TRACEY NORQUAY  

WHAT involves 343 canoes, 552 paddlers, 3000 landcrews and
officials, hard work, and is expected to raise $110,000-
120,000? The answer is the Victorian Red Cross Division's
Murray River Canoe Marathon, which I "landcrewed" for.
     The Murray River Canoe Marathon, which has been held for
16 years, involves a 403 km paddle down the Murray River from
Yarrawonga to Swan Hill.
     This year's paddlers ranged in age from 16 years old (the
winners) to 60. The standard ranged from semi-professional
competitive paddlers to those in hire canoes, who probably
began "training" a few weeks before the event. Many were
ecstatic to have 30 seconds off the record and did not stop
racing all day, others just wanted to finish, and say "done
that".
     But for dedication, or sheer desire for punishment, the
paddlers shared equal place with the landcrews, and officials.
     The paddlers had to paddle an average of eight hours a
day, 92 km on the first day, 96 km on the second, 77 km on the
third day, 62 km on the fourth, and 76 km on the fifth, making
the total 403 kilometres.
     Landcrews had to rise at dawn, cook breakfast, pack up the
tents, drive along corrugated dusty roads to checkpoints, meet,
feed, encourage and massage paddlers, and set up camp in the
next town.
     The Marathon committee and officials, who included
starters and wakerupperers, organised the event, and made sure
that everything was running smoothly. Starters check boat
numbers from 6.30 am each day - check and double check that
each boat starts, and that they had life jackets, etc;
wakerupperers risk almighty abuse, as they drive through the
marathon camp each morning at around 5 am, with Morning Has
Broken, Always Look on the bright side of Life, and Wakey Wakey
Everybody, blaring over the loud speakers.

