Guilt  By Laurie Clancy  

IT WAS Jim Ireland who introduced me to the group of lefties
with whom for a time during my adolescence I became involved.
I met Jim in a pub in Parkville when I was about twenty-one and
a final year honours student at Melbourne University. Every
Friday night I drank with a group of school teachers at the
Mayfair hotel - since demolished, like most of the landmarks
in my life - and they used to pay for my drinks, for the
spaghetti we would eat at a little restaurant in Elizabeth
Street, and then for me to be admitted to the jazz clubs we'd
visit every Friday night, Frank Traynor, Graham Bell and so on.
Most of them were jazz aficionados of a type that was common
in Melbourne in the fifties and sixties but which seems to have
died out since.
  Jim, though, was different from the others. For one thing he
was older. For another, he was not a chalky, though he had been
one briefly; that was how he had come to know the group. He
worked in his father's weighing-machine factory and used to
come into the saloon bar of the pub wearing oily worker's
overalls. I used to admire his obvious indifference to the
impact he made on the clientele. Apart from the teachers, most
of them wore suits, were from the executive side of the nearby
factories across the roundabout in North Melbourne, and were
clearly unused to drinking side by side with a man who might
well have been employed by them. But though the publican Maurie
used to sniff and try to ignore Jim's order if there were
anyone else about, he didn't have the nerve to kick Jim out.
If he had, the teachers would have walked out too.
  He had been drinking there some months before I said more than
two or three sentences to him. Then one night, after I had
refused to join the others in our usual meal, pleading work,
I stayed on and drank with him instead till the pub closed and
then he drove me out to Clayton to a party at the flat of a
friend. I found out a lot about him that night, including the
fact that he was a member of the Communist Party, the first I
had ever met. Apparently his left-wing friends held parties
most Friday nights, alternating at different people's places.
  Although over the next two years I was to go to many of these
I remember that first night particularly well. Our host was a
genuine member of the working classes, a young mechanic whose
only passion in life apart from the revolution was automobiles.
He had four or five of them, in various stages of
dismemberment, in his tiny front yard, and in his bath where
usually the bottles were stored with some ice at these parties,
was a car engine. I suspect that if I'd turned back the pillow
on his bed I would have discovered a differential underneath
it. When we arrived he was finishing a story to the dozen or
so guests who were there.
  "Anyway, just as I come round the corner, heading for the pole
I noticed this tow-truck on the other side of the road, next
to the ti-tree, the driver having a fag behind the wheel. We
must have not synchronized our watches properly. Too late to
stop. I go into the pole doing fifteen and it's turned out
perfect. The safety belts held, the front end was stove in and
the radiator busted.
  "The tow-truck driver has come over, a funny look on his face.
`I've had pretty fast calls in my time,' he says, `but this is
the first time I've ever got to the scene before the accident.'
When we told him the whole story he laughed himself silly and
gave us the ten bucks anyway without telling the cops."
  I watched them as they laughed. It was a strange group of
people, to me anyway. There was a left-wing medical student
from Monash. There was a conservationist, years ahead of his
time, whom everyone thought was a crank. He used to chase after
motorists on his motor bike and hand them back the cigarette
butts they'd thrown out of their cars. Later, he became a
minister in the state cabinet. There was the senior journalist
on The Worker, who wrote nearly all the paper under different
names. There were beefy, hectoring women, all of them much
older than myself, who spoke of starvation in developing
countries. It may be sexist but it was nevertheless true, in
those days at least, that nearly all female radicals were
physically unattractive. That didn't change until Vietnam.
Except for the mechanic Ernie and his handful of young mates,
the room burned with indignation and middle-aged sexuality.
  Sex, as Philip Larkin says, had only just been invented and
most of these people - especially those in their forties and
fifties - had taken to it with some enthusiasm. It was not
exactly your throwing your car keys in the centre of the room
scene, of the kind I read about years later in the Sunday
newspapers, but there was a continual sense of predatory
tension in the air, the women as much as the men. You had to
be careful turning on the lights as you entered bedrooms and
I quickly learned to pause on the outside of doorways to check
for sounds. There was little room in most of those new, cream
veneer flats.
  I was involved with little of it. For one thing I was much
younger than nearly everyone else at those gatherings and I
felt like someone in a group of people who had all known each
other for years, were tied together by ideology even when they
quarrelled about its meaning, and who in general spoke a
foreign language. Subterranean currents of passion swirled
around me but I was in the eye of the storm.
  They had affairs with married people! This was something that
until then I had only seen in books. The only woman in the
group who was about my age was Virginia, and she was having an
affair with a married man, the senior journalist on The Worker.
She was twenty-six and he was forty-seven. Perhaps because she
saw there was nothing to fear from me, we became friends and
I was her confidant. Once she told me about her most
embarrassing moment.
  "We were at a party at this flat, see, Sam, and Simon and I got
drunk and started screwing in the spare bedroom on top of all
the coats. Of course someone came in and turned the lights on
and there we were stark naked. They called all the other guests
in to take a look."
  I could tell from the gleam in her eyes that she had fond
memories of this embarrassing moment. As she sensed something
in my expression she added hastily, "Of course, I was
underneath, they couldn't see much of me."
  I laughed.
  At the end of that year I graduated with first class honours
and was taken on as a tutor at Melbourne, on the strict
understanding that it would be no longer than three years and
possibly only one. They were expecting me to go to Cambridge
and be cloned. I delayed over joining the Party. Jim was too
wise to push me. The truth was that after more than a year of
going to those parties my faith in the intellectual power and
integrity of Communism as practised in Australia had eroded.
The discussions these people had concerning Communism, when
they were not talking about screwing or football, rarely went
beyond questions of tactics and expedience. I was bored, though
no doubt if I could have participated more I would have been
happier.
  Then one night in April, Jim Ireland invited me to a party at
the house of a couple named the Martins. They were not
communists, he told me, but were sympathetic; and the crowd
would include some younger faces. By the time we arrived at
about ten I had had a fair bit to drink, though not too much,
and after a few minutes talking to a woman named Maureen
Stevens, who was in her mid to late twenties, I finally asked
her to dance.
  As we danced - a professional tango on her part, a kind of
frantic scuffling on mine, glazed smile fixed to my face - I
reached out on impulse and lightly squeezed her right nipple,
safely ensconced in its padded cage, as I should have been. She
recoiled as if she had been stung. For a few seconds she
remained still, before resuming to the music, but this time
dancing stiffly at about two paces distance, so that we both
looked as if we were being jerked along, like a pair of
marionettes.
  "Why did you do that?" she said quietly.
  Later, I thought of all the answers I could have made, that
might have at least allowed the moment to be glossed over.
"Because I wanted to." Why not the truth indeed? It took me
many more years to make the obvious discovery that most women
prefer not to be lied to. "Because you have beautiful breasts."
One, anyway. The answer I actually gave was the worst one
possible. "I didn't do anything."
  I had hoped she might leave it there but she was a stickler for
truth. "Yes, you did. You touched my breast."
  "It must have been an accident." I had begun to perspire. The
glazed smile had changed to one of sheer idiocy.
  "No, it wasn't," she said in the same quiet, uninsistent tone.
"You did it on purpose."
  To touch a woman's breast when you were hardly twenty-one -
that was hardly such a heinous crime surely? At around the same
time someone assassinated John F. Kennedy, the C.l.A. were not
long involved in "de-stabilising" the Dominican republic and
preparations for the build-up in Vietnam were well on the way.
And I had touched a woman's breast! Yet it is difficult to
convey the shame and guilt I continued to feel at the memory
of that foolhardy gesture - made, let me insist, far less out
of a sense of lust or even lasciviousness than out of mere
impulse and ignorance of the rules of the game and an eagerness
not to be seen not playing.
  At last the music stopped and with it her implacable
interrogation and we both resumed our seats, on opposite sides
of the flat. I reached for my now warm, flat beer and downed
it in one gulp. Across the room, in the spaces opened up by
gyrating dancers as they whirled past, I could see Maureen
talking to her husband, a small, slightly balding man in his
late twenties, more conservatively dressed than anyone else in
the room, with a blue reefer jacket (where have they
gone, by the way?) and dark tie. From time to time they glanced
across at me and I knew Philip was being told all about the
incident. I pretended to look away. Jim Ireland swung by,
dancing with his wife for a change, and winked at me. "You were
stiff," he said. "You touched up the only Catholic in the
room." As soon as I could, I left the flat and drove home in
my utility, sober for once and half-hoping as I always did on
the few occasions when I was driving sober late at night that
I would be picked up by the cops.
  Just for once it happened. As I drove down the Dandenong
Highway doing about forty-five I heard the wail of a siren
behind me and sure enough there the blue light flashing in my
rear vision mirror. There was only one cop in the car, a big
man who came towards me carrying a huge torch.  

