The suppliant By Graham Sheil  

For a one-time believer become estranged, the Church prescribes
he kneel - then believe. A rational man, surely, would
reverse the prescription, requiring decision first, then the
deed; and insist the prescribed order reveals merely the
suppliant's will. Yet by this illogic might an unsure painter
draw his first charcoal strokes, by this tenet might a writer
start a story.
   For Rodney Hallens - driving, the needle towards a hundred
and twenty, the bitumen ahead quite straight between scattered
gums - rationality had been his polestar. Yet since his return
to people and places that chafed with their familiarity, the
decision whether or not to again leave the familiar had become
a search for a symbol or sign that would present the decision
ready-made and unequivocal to him.
   We would see a sign a poet had lamented, and he sought
one. Specifically, at the moment, a road sign. But the pointed
direction assumed in his mind transatlantic proportions: a
sign that might point the future direction of his life.
   A sign-post ahead, and he eased his foot on the 
accelerator. But it was miles yet to his sign. He sped on. To
his left a gum-strewn plain; but on his right there
increasingly rose above the red sandy ground and gums, a range
of craggy shoulders and hips of naked rock.
   A different range, this, to those he had gone walking in
half a year before. There he had followed roads that climbed
and elbow-turned beside tumble-and-swirl streams, past houses
with antlers over doorways and cow pastures called Blaa-alm;
then leaving the road to climb the track that brought him above
the tree-line, to see the glacier on the Dachstein suspended
in the sky, and below, the village, dotted and blocked beside
the perfect pear shape of the lake.
   His memories of Europe were all like that: chocolate box
tableaus of fir and deer-antler and snow, or of an Openhaus
with marble steps and statues, or of artists painting at easles
among the sidewalk throng.
   His stay in Europe had been a dream exceeded.
   This European dream had grown out of his awakening from
another. This first dream had been of his own country rising
at last out of its cat-o'-nine-tails and English-overlord past
to become uniquely itself. His reading, visits to one-time
convict cells, dumps of gold and copper-mines, his notebooks
in which he recorded the accents and phrases with which old
people told of the past, had become the material out of which
he fashioned stories and plays of his country's past. Magazine
and stage-stories that were celebrations of the heroic.
   But what could rise heroically out of the clipped lawns and
pruned roses of suburban streets, the macadam, carbon-monoxide
and chrome of the highways?
   That something heroic and unique could rise, he had held no
doubt. And had counted himself a volunteer among those who
worked to make it happen.
   He had been woken from that dream by the sound of police
boots kicking into a felled demonstrator during the Johnston
visit. And hearing cabinet ministers braying hoarse with
denunciations of demonstrations against the war to be flagrant
lawlessness on our streets.
   The south-east Asian wars had been one part of his
awakening; the disintegration of his marriage had been the
other.
   His marriage to Victoria had commenced with a honeymoon on
the Queensland coast. Then year following year they'd returned
to walk far out on the mudflats at low tide. Days were spent
fishing from the beach; nights in playing cards with people
from the caravan park or holiday flats; and to clinging and
panting together in the warm nights.
   This life of shared hedonism came in time to be blown away
by the smallest of puffs: squabbles over the TV programs she
watched, her resentment that he would again be writing for
hours, or at yet another meeting or march or demonstration. In
the end they sold the house and split the surprisingly little
they had to show for their eight years together.
   Victoria was going north to the coastal town of their holidays.
She had arranged lease of a shop there and was confident she
could make a living selling to tourists and to people from the
caravan park opposite.
   Victoria delayed her own drive north until the day he left
for Europe. In what had previously been his car, she drove him
to the airport. They sat in the car park. Each, at first, made
attempts at conversation. Then they sat without speaking. They
shook hands. Neither attempted a kiss.
   His disenchantment with his marriage and his country had
become linked in his mind as the public and private faces of
the same thing. So as the plane took to the air and he saw the
coastline slip behind, it seemed symbolic to him that he had
left both on the same day.
   After his slow awakening from one dream, he dived from the
sky into another.
   He prowled London streets with a satchel of plays under arm
and a street guide in hand, searching out backstreet playhouses
where he left copies of his plays. He left manuscripts of
stories on editors' desks, being able to remind one editor of
a story previously published by his magazine.
   On his second morning in London, he rang Michael Bruthern.
Bruthern converted novels into playscripts for British
television.
   The pub in which they met was the one pub in London
(Bruthern pronounced) where you could get a Carlton and United
icy cold. The bar was crowded with Australians. Not the place,
Hallens reflected, to plead that cold beer gave him bladder
trouble.
   His bladder was still painful next day when Bruthern
introduced him to a television producer. The producer scanned
an offered script, pronounced it competent, though far too
Australian. He stated that later in the year they would be
embarking on a series of European Classics. Previously they had
done Madame Bovary and The Idiot. The producer suggested
Hallen make his own selection, do a precis of, say, ten
episodes, and a pilot script of the first episode. Nothing
promised, the producer said, but, well-l-l, we'll see ...
   Elated at not having to immediately set to work, Hallens
stayed another week, endured another bladder-aching session of
the amber fluid, told Bruthern he would return in about three
months when his money would have run low, then boarded a plane
for Hannover.
   If London had been an up-tempo version of a world he already
knew, Hannover was his introduction to what might well have
been another planet.
   His first aerial glimpse, was of ancient three-tiered barns
and triple-storeyed farm buildings squatting among flat green
fields. Then, feet-on-the-ground, he stared at men in peaked
caps and overcoats riding bicycles beneath bare branches of
linden and birch under soft grey skies.
   In this mystic world the theatres he attended were not the
cramped back street playhouses of London, but giant Openhausen
where doormen in tails ushered you to even the cheapest seats.
Here, too, was an open-air stage in palace gardens where a row
of gilt statues formed the backdrop. There a season of open air
theatre began in June, so he pencil-marked the program and
altered his plans so as to return for performances of Moliere
and Brecht and Shakespeare. 
   Then from train windows he glimpsed castles veiled in rain
and deer seen in the early-morning half-light; he walked
beneath linden trees in northern deer-parks and in Austria
climbed among rocks and snow and the mountain lying fir; at
sidewalk stalls he ate herring in rolls, smoked salmon in
rolls, and drank bier that was warm, frothy, and kind to his
bladder. On railway platforms and in carriages and pensione
rooms he read novels by Tolstoy and Turgenev and Flaubert, and
made tentative divisions of each into episodes.
   By then the shape of his own future had presented itself
sharp-edged and primary-coloured to him. He would live and
work, say, nine months of each year in London; then three
months of each year in Europe.
   Any likelihood of returning to Australia did not appear in
this possible future at all.
   He was in Milan, visiting prescribed galleries, and had
returned to his box-sized room after a morning that included
Leonardo's Last Supper, when the proprietor handed him a
package. He sat on the bed and opened it to find inside a
letter from Bruthern, and a sealed envelope with an Australian
postmark.
   Though the second letter intrigued him the more, he read the
first. Bruthern wrote that while none of the London playhouses
expressed interest in his plays, a theatre in Leeds was
impressed to the point of almost certainly putting on one of
his plays in July or August. Would he be able to be present
during rehearsals?
   The second letter was typewritten and as terse as a
telegram: 

      Rod  
Vicki's stacked your car and in hospital. The
     Holden's a write-off and Vicki damn-near. 
     On Intensive Care list. If she gets over 
     concussion etc she'll be in traction for months. 
     Shop's shut. Rent and wholesalers' bills still 
     to be paid and bank low. Don't let a little 
     thing like this spoil your gadding about. No 
     love
                                               Val.

   His youngest sister had never accepted his marriage to
Victoria was finished. On re-reading the letter, he felt the
barb go in. He left the room to walk the crowded footpaths,
apologizing to people he kept bumping and finding himself at
corners without any idea of which way to turn. He became hungry
and bought cassata but later found he was still holding the now
soggy cone and the cassata melted in pink and green dribbles
over his wrist and down his sleeve. Later that night, he was
first sarcastic, then bullying, to the man who answered the
'phone at the airport terminal.


Along the Queensland coast Summer had continued through the
months of Autumn without a glimpse of the sun-routed season.
Holiday flats bordering the esplanade and the foreshore caravan
park continued full in May. Though mackerel began their run up
the coast on-calender, the winter whiting refused to appear.
   Rodney Hallens twice put down his cases and tried to arrange
his coat on top of one of them as he walked the esplanade
footpath. The second time was outside Victoria's shop. He stood
sweating, as he peered through locked glass doors at the rows
of groceries behind counters, the deep freeze, card racks,
fishing rods, reels and lines arranged in a corner. Though he
held the key, he pushed arms into coat sleeves and carried the
cases around the corner at the restaurant next door; then two
blocks along and up stairs to Victoria's second storey flat. 
   Plane, train, bus and taxi had finally discharged him at the
Harcourt Bay Hospital an hour and a half previously. Mrs
Hallens, he had been told, was now out of Intensive Care. She
was in Ward Three. Yes, he could go up.
   Ward Three was really a balcony enclosed by high, vertical,
aluminium louvres that could be opened, angled and shut.
Victoria lay with one leg bare from the knee raised in
traction. He saw her eyes open wide on seeing him, then she
closed them. She said he might at least have given her warning.
   For an hour he sat beside the bed, trying not to stare at
the stainless steel pin to which weights were attached that
protruded each side of her shin. He made the bantering remarks
he had prepared during the thirty hour plane flight; then they
sat, not so much conversing as each offering phrases then
waiting and watching to see if the other accepted.
   On subsequent visits that tentative note remained. Only when
discussing pricing or ordering or the takings for the day did
they regard themselves on neutral ground.
   Each day he opened the shop at eight, took delivery of
bread and milk, then swept the floor and the footpath outside.
At first he had taken an exercise book, pencils and thesaurus,
for he had definitely decided upon Flaubert's Sentimental
Education as the European Classic to be adapted for television.

