Angostura bitters By Anthony Turner  

Marcus Brockwell hadn't heard from his friend for close on
twenty years. So it was with a mixture of surprise, delight and
an unnerving sense of time folding back on itself that he had
taken the person-to-person call from Glenn Adalian who was now
living in the Caribbean island of Trinidad.
  So unprepared had Brockwell been for such a phone call that
as he reflected about it afterwards he came to the conclusion
that he had responded to his good friend's excitement and
vitality with gibbering incoherence. Alternately spellbound and
speechless, his replies were like aimless flintlock rifle shots
in a barrage of rapid machine-gun fire.
  `Yes.' `Sure.' `Fine.' `Of course!' `I'd be delighted to.'
Such inconsequential phrases; and yet, the outcome was he'd
committed himself to flying to Trinidad to renew a friendship
with a man who in his youth had been his closest friend but who
now was no more than a stranger. He'd agreed, instinctively,
impetuously, in much the same way as he'd accepted the crazy
dares and challenges from Glenn Adalian in London all those
years ago. He wandered around the living-room of his flat in
Onslow Square, dazed and pensive. How did Glenn know where he
lived? What was he doing in Trinidad? Would they still have
anything in common? Indeed, would he even recognise him? These
were just some of the questions that rattled through his mind,
demanding answers that only a trip to Trinidad could provide.
  The international airport at Port of Spain had about it all
the colour and frenetic activity of the United Nations
Secretariat before a crucial vote. Men, women and children from
a hundred races arrived, departed, scurried, greeted, hugged,
wept, collected luggage, queued at customs and bundled into
taxis. It made one feel that the whole world was on holiday -
a universal mardi gras bobbing and weaving to the rhythmic beat
of a Calypso band. And hugger-mugger somewhere in the surge of
bodies stood Marcus Brockwell, fully stretched to the tip-toe
limit of his short frame, searching for the welcoming smile of
the man who only the day before had changed the whole direction
of his life with a single phone call. As the crowd cleared and
there was still no sign of his friend he was gripped by a
sudden sense of unease. There had been no discussion of the
urgency of his visit, nor of its duration. He didn't even know
Glenn's address. The arrangement was that they would meet at
the airport on the arrival of British West Indies Airline
flight 274, the linking flight between London, Barbados and
Port of Spain. He sat down on his small overnight bag outside
the main entrance and watched the seemingly endless flow of
taxis collect and discharge their passengers. He shouldn't have
come. He should have made some excuse. Pressure of work. G.C.E.
exam papers to mark. An imminent trip with the faculty of
anthropology to some stone age tribes in Papua or Borneo. But
the university had broken for the summer recess and he was at
a loose end, without family ties or firm commitments. That,
combined with a natural curiosity and an almost quaint sense
of loyalty, was the reason he had flown halfway around the
world. Besides, one must owe something to a man who through
college, National Service, and those halcyon years in London
and Paris, had shown him how the intellect alone has power to
lift the emotional intensity of one's reactions to life, and
yet subsume them in a consciousness that is both silent and
sublime.
  The years rolled back, like the pages of a forgotten diary
caught by a gust of air. Then, suddenly, the past and present
locked together in a strange pluperfect, for there was no
doubting the broad grin, raucous laugh and sweeping gestures
of the man leaning out of the E-type Jaguar. It was Glenn
Adalian. Puffier in the cheeks and thinner around the hairline,
but certainly him.
  As the effusive greetings subsided and they drove through the
centre of Port of Spain Adalian kept up a tirade of tourist-
guide chatter about the island's geography, history and main
attractions. `This is Independence Square, formerly Marine
Square, which isn't a square at all.' `We're now in Frederick
Street with the famous Queen's Park Savannah on your right;
I've watched many a great Test Match there, and just near the
entrance you'll see Columbus's anchor. It was reclaimed from
the bottom of the sea at Point Icacos after four hundred
years.' The commentary continued to flow in and out of Marcus
Brockwell's mind. From time to time fragments of disconnected
phrases seemed to cling and then disperse: `purple eggplant and
blushing mangoes', `toucans and tufted coquettes', `rendezvous
of races', `third largest exporter of oil', `secret formula of
the Angostura Bitters factory', and a half-caught snippet about
the apparitions of somebody Fatima. But all Brockwell could
actually see was a succession of Hindu temples, Benedictine
monasteries, Jewish synagogues and Moslem mosques, interspersed
with the occasional unremarkable shop and huge close-ups of the
shiny sides of vast tourist coaches. He had an uncomfortable
feeling of being talked at rather than spoken to.
  Soon they were clear of the city, taking the winding coast
road that arcs around Las Cuevas Bay. Lush green valleys and
dense plantations on one side vied with white beaches gently
washed by the clear blue waters of the Caribbean Sea on the
other. A few miles from Blanchisseuse Glenn Adalian took the
narrow mountain pass leading high into the hinterland of the
island. There, at the end of a long dirt track a thousand
metres above sea level, he drew the car to a halt outside a
large, rambling, timber house. With its high stockade fence in
front and sheer cliff face behind one was almost encouraged to
search for gunpowder kegs, lookout towers and musket
emplacements.
  `Roger!' Bellowed Glenn Adalian through a small peep-hole in
the solid oak gate.
  There was a crunch of heavy boots on a short gravel path
followed by the sound of ponderous iron chains being tugged
against a counter-weight. The gate yawned open to reveal a
towering figure with a bushy black beard. His powerful arms and
baggy overalls took Brockwell's mind back to the village
blacksmith of his childhood in Kent.
  The introductions were brief, but cordial enough, and Roger
Lockyer led the way up to the house which Brockwell now could
see was set in about 12 hectares of fruit trees and vegetable
allotments. The house was expansive, lavishly furnished and
professionally decorated. Its eastern side was a wall of
picture windows and sliding glass doors that gave access to a
wide quarry-tiled sundeck.
  `Take a seat outside while I fix us a drink,' said Glenn
Adalian as Roger took his bag up an imposing marble staircase.
  Brockwell walked out onto the sundeck and sat down on one of
the reclining canvas chairs. The view across the Sangre Grande
to the Atlantic Ocean was truly magnificent. At this altitude
the air was clean, cool and invigorating. To the north-east the
coastline of Tobago was clearly visible beneath a thin
atmospheric mist.
 `Fantastic view, isn't it!' enthused Glenn Adalian as he and
Roger Lockyer brought out trays of cocktails and canapes. `You
can almost see the medals on Simon Bolivar's battledress
reflecting in the Orinoco from here,' he chuckled.
 `With a little help from a retroactive telescope!' Roger added
dryly.
  Brockwell sipped his very tall cocktail adorned with pawpaw,
muskmelon and guava and winced a little as the sharp taste
struck his palate.
 `How's your drink?' asked Roger with a wry smile.
 `Oh fine, just fine!' Marcus replied, then his curiosity got
the better of him.
 `What on earth do you put in this concoction?'
 `We call it an Angostura Libation,' explained Glenn Adalian.
`It's made from the thirty secret ingredients of Angostura
Bitters laced with a liberal quantity of Old Oak rum. It's an
acquired taste, I'm afraid. Would you prefer a Martini?'
 `No, no! I'm getting used to the subtle flavour now,' he lied.
 `Oh, before I forget, here's something to cover the expenses
of your trip,' said his host, almost in a whisper, as he took
a folded slip of paper from his pocket and pressed it into
Brockwell's hand, under the table.
 Looking down, Brockwell could see that it was a cheque for
&pound;10,000, to be drawn from a branch of Lloyd's Bank in
Westminster. He started to remonstrate that this was far in excess 
of any costs he'd incurred and that he certainly hadn't expected to
be reimbursed, anyway. But there was something so vehement in
his friend's insistence, and such an inexplicable look of
pleading in his eyes, that Brockwell decided to let the matter
rest and simply leave the cheque behind when he returned to
London.
  It wasn't until they gathered for dinner that night that
Marcus Brockwell began to piece together the strange lives of
the two residents of this mountainside fortress. Apparently,
they'd met in a Turkish bath in Goodge Street about eighteen
years ago. They struck up a friendship which over a period of
time developed into what Roger Lockyer delicately described as
`a neo-platonic love affair'. On a whim one day, when a
particularly harsh winter had reduced this work-shy, homeless
couple to little more than starving tramps, they decided to
invest their last £2 on a Soccer Pools coupon. If they
won a few pounds they'd rent a flat. If they lost they'd slit
their wrists.
  Improbable though it may seem, they won. Not a few pounds but
the first prize payout of £2,105,000. With it they
travelled the world for ten years. From Thessaloniki to Aleppo,
Shiraz and Kandahar then back and forwards across the earth;
from the mouth of the Indus to the Ganges Delta, through the
length and breadth of Burma and Thailand to Indonesia, west
across the Indian Ocean to Madagascar and Mozambique and north
to Cairo. They explored the highlands and rainforests of South
America like misplaced Livingstones then bobbed and weaved
their way through the war-torn republics of Latin America till
they reached the Gulf of Mexico. After a year in the United
States they searched around for a permanent home. For several
months they scoured the islands of the Caribbean before
eventually finding the block of land on which they built this
house. It combined all the qualities of remoteness and
inaccessibility with clean air and scenic beauty. The soil was
fertile and the land large enough to provide for all their
needs. Apart from the fruit trees and vegetable allotments that
Brockwell had already seen they had a cow that grazed on the
grassy slopes and a goat that thrived on tit-bits and left-
overs from the kitchen garden. Between them they produced more
than enough milk to make all the fresh butter, cheese and
yoghurt that the two men so enjoyed.
  `How long have you lived here?' asked Brockwell, his
curiosity aroused.
  `Going on for six years isn't it, Roger?'
  `Yes, six years on the 20th April.'
  `But you get out pretty frequently, I presume!'
  `No, not at all,' Adalian replied. `I've been outside the
grounds only twice since we moved in. Once to phone you, and
once to pick you up at the airport. Roger hasn't even set foot
on the other side of the fence.'
  `We don't need to,' affirmed Lockyer, then feeling that some
sort of explanation was required, added `We saw enough of the
world's foibles and absurdities on our travels to last us a
lifetime. You'll have seen that we have no telephone,
television or radio here. We receive no newspapers or
magazines, know nobody else on the island and, apart from
yourself, have had no visitors. We haven't any idea what's going
on in the outside world and frankly aren't the least bit interested.'
  `But doesn't that make your house a kind of prison?' Brockwell
ventured.

